Rollins College

Tipping the Scales of Lady Justice:
A Feminist Navigation of Mitigating Circumstances in the Criminal Justice System

Jiya Manchanda
PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, And Madmen
Dr. Eric Smaw
April 12, 2023

There are cases in which the greatest daring is the greatest wisdom,  and then there are those cases that challenge our humanity in ways so unprecedented we cannot fathom them… [for] the law is not just about punishing the guilty, but also about protecting the innocent and providing relief to those who have been wronged…  All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and [women are] at last compelled to face with sober senses, [their] real conditions of life, and [their] relations with [their] kind…  [After all,] the true measure of any society can be found in how it treats its most vulnerable members,  [and] injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.  

Throughout human history, societies have struggled to resolve the tension between their pursuit of justice and their desire for mercy.  The concept of ‘mitigating factors’ has thus emerged as a means of reconciling these competing interests, and seeks to diminish both criminal culpability and the severity of punishment by acknowledging the influence of extenuating circumstances on individuals’ behavior.  Its roots can be traced back to the Code of Hammurabi, a Babylonian law code from the 18th century B.C.E.,  which later was developed in medieval England by way of common law.  Today, in the modern American penal system, mitigating circumstances remain a vital component to the administration of justice.  Alas, the implementation of such principles has historically been fraught with inconsistencies, with the scales of justice being tipped toward the privileged and the powerful;  the marginalized and oppressed instead being left to languish in the shadows of inequality.  The immutable realities of gender and class have injected themselves into the very fabric of the law, casting doubt on the fairness and impartiality of the criminal justice system.  Nowhere is this more evident than in the plight of low-income women, whose voices have been silenced by the institutional machinery of the patriarchal state.  In what follows, I will offer various philosophical, jurisprudential, and pragmatic analyses of the criminal justice system to illustrate a conception of the role that mitigating circumstances play in sentencing. Ultimately wielding an intersectional approach, I argue that it is incumbent upon the United States to take such factors into consideration to ensure justice for all.
Prima facie, let’s establish the United States’ conception of society. 18th century political philosopher John Locke identifies, in his Second Treatise, that all humans are inherently equal, and thus possess the natural rights to life, liberty, and bodily integrity.  In accordance with the law of nature, i.e., reason,  individuals realize they cannot protect these rights on their own.  They subsequently contract into civil society, wherein they divulge their absolute freedom of being their own judge, jury, and executioner when someone violates these natural rights, unto a democratic government that abides by the rule of law.  Importantly, jurisprudential philosopher Ronald Dworkin argues, in Law’s Empire, that law is a social construct resulting from such institutions.  He draws an important distinction between primary rules,  secondary rules,  and legal principles,  for the purpose of demonstrating that law itself is a union of these components.  Primary rules guide behavior by imposing duties or conferring powers upon people;  whereas secondary rules explain the scope and function of primary rules,  provide ways to alter them,  and outline how to adjudicate them.  Together, primary and secondary rules constitute ‘procedural justice,’ i.e., due process, which evaluates individuals equally before the law.  This includes the defendant’s right to an attorney, a “speedy and public trial,” an “impartial jury” of their peers, and so on. 
However, some laws written in blackletter can fail to capture the full extent of justice, and abiding by them may result in an outcome that “shocks the conscience… of the people.”  Such cases exist in the so-called ‘penumbra,’ and must be adjudicated using principles of law, such as equality, liberty, privacy, and so on.  In applying these principles and accounting for the context of a case, courts are able to uphold ‘substantive justice,’ i.e., fairness, such that the guilty are punished and the innocent go free.  Thus, judicial decisions are justifiable insofar as and up until they uphold both procedural and substantive justice. 
Locke’s criminal justice system stands as a testament to his state’s unwavering obligation to ensuring that the social contract remains unbroken by way of punishing violations of primary or secondary rules.  His focus on ‘reparations’ and ‘restraint’ as components of restorative justice elucidates offenders’ duty toward their wider community.  For Locke, the purpose of reparations is to make amends for the wrongdoing committed;  while restraint serves a twofold objective, the first of which is to deter the person who committed the crime from recidivistic behavior.  The second purpose is to deter others from committing similar crimes, such that society at large would be better off.  This notion echoes his broader political philosophy that emphasizes the importance of accountability. 
Perhaps most significant to Locke’s criminal justice system, however, is the notion of punishment being “proportionate to [the] transgression” committed.  The Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has since emerged, conferring upon citizens an important negative right,  i.e., the freedom from “excessive… cruel and unusual punishments.”  The United States Supreme Court, ever vigilant of this constitutionally enshrined mandate for fundamental respect of human dignity, has consistently held that pertinent information regarding the defendant’s age, prior criminal record, character, state of mind, and disability, alongside the nature and particulars of the offense committed, must be presented at trial.  This practice of considering circumstances that might mitigate criminal culpability is consistent with Dworkin’s jurisprudence, wherein the purpose of such examination is to ensure that a principled and equitable sentence is meted out, one that is tempered by the distinctive contextual nuances of a case, and for the purpose of potentially alleviating the severity of a sentence.  As such, accounting for the offender’s capacity to be held responsible, and thereby their degree of blameworthiness, would uphold both procedural and substantive justice.
The issue of such mitigating factors carries profound significance in cases involving capital punishment. Through a series of landmark decisions dating back to 1972, the judicial branch has diligently sought to alleviate the capriciousness of the death penalty by emphasizing the criticality of affording the presiding judge or jury the discretionary opportunity to evaluate all relevant mitigating evidence prior to arriving at a sentence.  The case of Penry v. Lynaugh,  and subsequently Bigby v. Dretke,  was remanded by the Supreme Court and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals respectively. The courts ordered retrials on the basis that the jury instructions for the death penalty failed to account for mitigating factors, specifically the defendant’s mental health.  Further, in Tennard v. Dretke, the prosecution sought to exclude evidence of a low IQ in the penalty phase of the trial.  The Supreme Court ruled that neglecting to consider this, among other relevant mitigating factors in capital punishment cases such as Lockett v. Ohio,  would violate the principle of proportionality,  and thus constitute “cruel and unusual punishment.” 
Still, it is these complexities of the human condition that give rise to various defenses that can and have been invoked by defendants in a court of law. For instance, the M’Naghten rule of 1843,  established that a person can be found not guilty by reason of insanity if they were suffering from a mental defect at the time of the offense, and did not know the nature and quality of their actions or did not know that what they were doing was wrong.  As such, those who end another’s life, but are classified as insane under the law, would be considered killers, not murderers.  The Deific Decree Delusion is an instance in which this has been employed, where a defendant claims that he or she committed an alleged crime under the belief that they were acting under divine compulsion or mandate.  They are thereby considered “incapable of distinguishing right from wrong with respect to the act.”  The notable People v. Serravo case of 1990 involved a successful attempt at this defense, wherein a jury verdict found defendant Robert Pasqual Serravo not guilty by reason of insanity of attempt to commit first degree murder of his wife “upon the [perceived] direction of God.” 
An alternative defense that has been the subject of much controversy is the Affluenza defense, which suggests that a defendant’s wealthy upbringing results in their inability to understand the consequences of their actions.  Such was the case in Texas v. Couch.  Ethan Couch, a teenager from Texas, caused a car crash that killed four people and injured several others in 2013.  Given that he had been raised in a privileged environment and had never learned to take responsibility for his actions, thereby “demonstrating” to the presiding judge that he was “unable to distinguish right from wrong,” Couch’s sentence was reduced from the death penalty to ten years of probation and mandatory treatment in a residential rehabilitation center.  The criminal justice system, known by Legal Realists for its deviation from adherence to the principles of substantive justice upon which it was founded,  has increasingly revealed its true nature by accepting these contentious legal defenses that, without a doubt, “plague [our] conscience.”  The success of the Affluenza defense perfectly embodies the disparate treatment of individuals from different socioeconomic backgrounds before the law, raising concerns about the impact of poverty and lack of economic opportunities on crime rates:

… society is not providing all citizens with an equal chance to remain law-abiding. And if it is the poor or members of minority groups who disproportionately wind up incarcerated – in spite of the fact that their acts are not in any objective sense more socially harmful than the acts of certain, more privileged members of society – then our society is not successfully selecting out the truly deserving for punishment… For it is the poor or disadvantaged who have the least power to determine the terms and conditions of their labor (when they are not simply treated as unemployable by such enterprises) and who are most susceptible to the use by such enterprises of their economic and political power in other ways. 

Still, none have been more controversial or morally reprehensible than the successful aversion of the death penalty in the infamous case of Samuel Little.  Samuel was raised by his abusive grandmother, following his abandonment by his mother Bessie Mae Little, who was a young prostitute that gave birth to him while incarcerated.  His deviant behavior seemingly originated from a young age, with his confession to experiencing sexual fantasies about strangling women after seeing his kindergarten teacher touch her neck.  During his teenage years, Little sought to satisfy his macabre curiosity by collecting true crime magazines depicting women being choked; he subsequently dropped out of high school.  Despite having been confined to a juvenile institution in Omaha, Nebraska in 1956 for breaking and entering into property, Little continued to have run-ins with the law, including but not limited to being charged for driving under the influence, fraud, shoplifting, solicitation, armed robbery, aggravated assault, and rape. 
In 2014, Samuel Little was convicted of dozens of counts of murder, with his ‘modus operandi’ M.O. being revealed to be choking women.  As such, he came to be known as the Choke-and-Stroke Killer, for which he received a life sentence without the possibility of parole.  Despite his adamant claims of innocence even on the day of the verdict, Little made a chilling confession to having taken the lives of 93 women between 1970 and 2005 after being confronted with DNA evidence of the same.  The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI) Violent Criminal Apprehension Program (ViCAP) has validated his culpability in at least 60 of the murders, setting a somber record for the largest number of confirmed victims by a serial killer in U.S. history. 
Peter Vronsky’s book, Sons of Cain, provides an exposé on Samuel Little and delves into the perplexing reasons that compelled him to commit such heinous acts.  Vronsky identifies several characteristics that are common among serial killers, including a lack of empathy, a need for power and control, and a tendency toward sadism,  suggesting that sexual gratification, revenge, and a desire for attention or recognition are potential motivations behind the behavior.  In this view, serial murder “… is [sexually] pleasurable [to perpetrators] precisely because it is degrading to others.” 
Of course, this does not undermine the fact that procedural justice would demand a court to consider Little’s childhood trauma as potentially mitigating his sentence. However, in light of the Supreme Court’s decision in Kahler v. Kansas, defendants can no longer rely on Insanity and similar defenses to claim that their condition made them unable to differentiate between right and wrong.  Instead, as of 2020, individuals with a history of trauma may only argue that their condition prevented them from forming the necessary intent, i.e., ‘mens rea,’ for the crime.  Still, given Little’s perverse addiction to serial murder beyond the circumstances in which he grew up, it is difficult to draw a causal link between the two. As such, upholding substantive justice would entail the necessary conclusion that reducing Samuel Little’s sentence by applying mitigating circumstances would violate the principle of fairness, and “shock the conscience” of the court. 
Importantly, Vronsky argues that certain groups of people are perceived as degraded in modern culture, media, and society,  and are consequently targeted by homicidal psychopaths who seek to fulfill their increasingly addictive sexual and hedonistic fantasies through serial killing.  He notes that the victims of serial killers often include street prostitutes and individuals who are homeless or impoverished: groups that are often seen as society’s “throwaways.”  Such was the case of Little, whose desire for control and domination made it so that his victims were predominantly poor young women of color.  Vronsky suggests that Little was able to continue his crimes for so long because the disappearances of his victims were more easily overlooked by the judicial system than they might have, had his victims been from more affluent backgrounds.  His strategy is particularly weighty in the context of American “rape culture,”  wherein Vronsky himself acknowledges that Little’s targeting of vulnerable women who were involved in prostitution and drug use was part of a larger pattern of violence against women in the United States. 
In light of the patriarchal state pushing women – particularly low-income women – to the margins of society, and relegating them to the shadows of invisibility and neglect, a feminist critique is in order. In her seminal work, The Sexual Contract, Carole Pateman provocatively contends that the patriarchy is rooted in the sexual subordination of women,  and this inequality has been insidiously normalized by the social contract that governs liberal democracies like the United States.  Her astute analysis exposes how traditional conceptions of modern society being based on free individuals agreeing to contract into society are inherently flawed, because they ignore the inextricable links between gender, power, and politics.  That the social contract assumes individual autonomy and equality, is a paradigm that perpetuates oppressive gender norms and restricts the agency of marginalized groups, particularly low-income women.  In her view, it legitimizes male domination by way of socioeconomically exploitative practices,  as seen in Locke’s Second Treatise,

… the husband and wife, though they have but one common concern, yet having different understandings, will unavoidably sometimes have different wills too; it therefore being necessary that the last determination, i.e., the rule, should be placed somewhere; it naturally falls to the man’s share, as the abler and the stronger. 

This is “positively dystopian.”  As such, Pateman posits the notion that sexual harassment of all forms helps men maintain their patriarchal ‘right.’  Similar stereotypical expectations, then, serve to further reinforce women’s status as second-class citizens. 
To better understand how these inequalities function within the criminal justice system, let us look to other instances of mitigating circumstances. One notable defense that is commonly invoked is that of Necessity in the context of self-defense.  Such an argument may be used to establish a defendant’s actions as justifiable and necessary upon coercion or duress.  This is particularly weighty in the context of Brown v. Jordan,  a case that arose from the Me-Too Movement,  with Cyntoia Brown-Long, a poor African American woman, being sentenced to life in prison at age 16 for killing a man who had hired her for sex in 2004.  Brown’s defense that she acted in necessity and fear of her life being threatened, upon being forced into prostitution by a violent pimp, was ultimately unsuccessful. 
Similarly, the Crime of Passion defense is one in which the defendant argues that their actions were a result of an extreme emotional response, often related to a sudden and intense provocation.  This defense claims that the defendant was temporarily unable to control their actions, due to a “heat of the moment” reaction, and by extension, cannot have the ‘mens rea’ necessary for guilt.  In 1981, Marianne Bachmeier shot and killed the man who raped and murdered her seven-year-old daughter, Anna.  The perpetrator, Günter Willi Grabert, had been released on parole after serving just six years of his life sentence for raping and killing another young girl.  After shooting Grabert, Bachmeier immediately surrendered to the authorities but was subsequently charged with murder;  the prosecution ultimately rejected her defense as it did Brown’s.  As such, it is evident that there exist institutional disparities wherein rich and powerful men are granted more leniency for their actions, such as in the case of the Deific Decree Delusion or the Affluenza defense, while poor and marginalized women are not afforded the same privileges.
In her seminal work, Sex and Social Justice, Martha Nussbaum explains this phenomenon, delving deeper into the deep-rooted patriarchal assumptions that continue to permeate the creation, interpretation, and application of laws.  Her observations highlight the damaging effects of social norms and women’s historical marginalization on their unequal treatment under the law, as well as the perpetuation of injustices that disproportionately affect them.  In particular, women who do not conform to, and dare to transgress traditional gender roles, are often seen as threatening the order maintained by the social contract, and therefore deserving of punishment.  In this manner, women who commit crimes increasingly find themselves faced with double harm. Not only do they receive harsher penalties from the legal system, but they also suffer under the crushing weight of being stigmatized by society as deviant and unworthy of sympathy; subject, instead, to what appears to be “cruel and unusual punishment.” 
Renée Heberle, in her insightful article, Disciplining Gender; Or, Are Women Getting Away with Murder? argues that women are often held to different and higher standards than men when it comes to crime and punishment.  She suggests that the ‘evil woman hypothesis’ continues to breed gendered stereotypes about women’s “proper” roles as “caregivers” and “nurturers,” reinforcing the narrative that women who commit crimes are inherently more malevolent than their male counterparts.  For this reason, women that commit murder are punished more severely than their male counterparts.  Heberle presents a compelling case for how implicit and explicit biases work in conjunction to influence outcomes in the criminal justice system, and can lead to a profound lack of empathy and understanding for women who have been subjected to abuse or violence. 
This analysis carries special significance in the context of Aileen Wuornos’ case. Wuornos was born in 1956, soon after which her parents divorced.  Her biological father was later convicted of sex crimes against children and subsequently committed suicide while serving time in prison.  Her mother abandoned her and her older brother Keith, leaving them to be raised by adopted parents, who singled out Aileen when employing corporeal punishment.  Aileen’s stepmother Britta refused to have her evaluated for the vision and hearing problems she was diagnosed with, “insisting that she simply “did not pay attention.””  The children were later raised by their maternal grandparents.  Aileen’s grandfather Lauri was reported to be physically abusive, beating her with a belt, and sexually abusing her, leading to her engaging in sexual activity since she was eleven years old.  She often had group sex with older boys in her neighborhood,  acts that came with:

… denigration – she was nicknamed “Cigarette Pig” … for her propensity to exchange sex for cigarettes. When she attempted to form an attachment to some of the boys she had sex with, she was brutally and publicly rejected. 

Aileen then began to drink and use drugs like marijuana and cocaine as a way of coping with the traumatic experiences of her childhood.  She was subsequently expelled from school in the ninth grade for missing classes, receiving low grades, fighting with her peers, and having conflicts with her teachers.  She became pregnant of rape at the age of 14, giving birth to a son who was forcibly taken from her and placed for adoption. 
In 1989, Aileen turned to street prostitution,  and was arrested multiple times for various crimes, including assault and armed robbery.  In Vronsky’s words,

… she was a roadside ho and the rougher and more haggard she looked the more she attracted a specific clientele desiring some quick and dirty sex with an underclass female with whom they would never imagine being seen in the light of day. They were not looking for a girlfriend substitute; these men wanted the fix of degrading sex. Aileen was for them the roadside Cigarette Pig of her childhood, and no matter how rough and worn she looked she would have suffered no shortage of clients who wanted this kind of sex…  [Aileen’s first murder] was of Mallory. [He] was the owner of an appliance repair shop and was known to frequent prostitutes. After her arrest, Aileen would claim that she had shot him because she “realized” he was going to rape her. 

Wuornos’s seven victims were all men that she alleged had solicited her for sex, and had either raped or attempted to rape her while she was “hooking on the highways.”  In her trial, her defense argued that she killed her victims in self-defense, fearing for her life after they had attacked her.  However, it is evident through the tone with which Vronsky himself talks about Aileen, as did the court and the media, that at the very least, they thought she either was lying or “got what she deserved.”  In treating her as one of society’s “throwaways,” he commits the same injustice for which he condemns Samuel Little. 
In Nussbaum and Heberle’s view, Aileen’s history as a prostitute and the fact that her victims were all men would all be forms of her simultaneous conformity to and deviation from societal norms. On the one hand, she is viewed as a sexual object whose body men are entitled to, elucidating the notion that “if [women] are not at the table, then [they]’re probably on the menu.”  Importantly, attitudes and behaviors that trivialize or excuse sexual violence, such as the commodification and exploitation of women’s bodies, can breed institutions that condone and even encourage the use of violence as a means of asserting dominance or control over others,  such as rape in the Prison Industrial Complex.  This can also contribute to the development of attitudes and behaviors that view women as disposable “things” to be used and discarded at will.  On the other, Aileen is viewed as an “impure monster” for engaging in prostitution and subsequently murder.  In this light, her behavior implicitly influenced the legal system’s decision to charge her with multiple counts of first-degree murder and seek the death penalty; testament to the fact that proportionality in punishment looks different for women than it does for men. 
In rejecting Aileen’s mitigating circumstances, the criminal justice system effectively ignored the conditions under which she killed the seven men. In fact, given that she had not undergone the full extent of child development,  she would have had diminished cognitive capacities: 

[Her] verbal IQ was tested at a low 80, but despite her behavioral problems, she did not receive any counseling probably as a result of Britta’s resistance. During her trial, one psychiatrist testified that there was a wide gap between Aileen’s verbal IQ and her functional IQ, which apparently was quite high. This gap could have resulted in the uncontrollable behavioral episodes. The psychiatrist described it as “sand in the fuel line” of an otherwise working engine. Her brain sputtered-would stop and start. Sometimes she was emotionally in control, at other times she’d be raging completely out of it. 

As such, Aileen was not entirely compos mentis. Whether or not the men had demonstrated sufficiently that they were going to rape her, due to the state of her mental health, impaired memory, borderline personality disorder, severe depression, paranoia, and visual problems, she would necessarily have perceived them to be a threat to her. Regardless, she did not meet fulfil neuroscientist V.S. Ramachandran’s criteria for conscious autonomy in those circumstances, i.e., stability of perception, memory, and choice;  in which case, she did not have the full ability to consent.  Aileen was taken advantage of, following which she “shot herself in the abdomen” in a botched suicide attempt.  Her case should never have gone to trial. 
Carol Jacobsen and Lora Lempert argue in Institutional Disparities, that incarcerated women face profound injustices when seeking clemency, i.e., the process by which their sentence can be reduced, due to a lack of consideration for their gendered experiences.  Wuornos’ history of sexual abuse and exploitation, which was largely dismissed during her trial and sentencing, is an example of this bias.  By ignoring her mitigating factors, including the state of her mental health, the criminal justice system perpetuated institutional disparities, and did not address the underlying issues that lead to women’s involvement in crime.  This is particularly important in light of the fact that poor women are more likely to receive the death penalty than middle to upper class men.  Substantive justice, in Wuornos’ case, was so far violated that it is difficult to reconcile how this may coexist with the American Dream. Today, her case and its outcome of the death penalty still “plague [our] conscience,” for we live in a world she will never see.  
In Aileen’s case, what perpetuated the problem was that her defense attorney was a used car salesman prior to representing her, who had signed a deal with Hollywood film producers while still representing her.  The deal included a clause that he would receive a percentage of any profits made from the movie Monster.  Following this, he effectively compelled her to sign a plea deal confessing to her alleged guilt and waive her right to appeal any judicial decision, demonstrating a clear conflict of interest.  There were also allegations of prosecutorial misconduct and evidence tampering.  In 1984, the Supreme Court, in Strickland v. Washington, established that the ineffective assistance of counsel violated a defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights insofar as and up until their attorney’s performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, and that the deficient performance prejudiced the defense.  As such, Aileen’s due process rights were violated not once, not twice, but repeatedly throughout her case by the criminal justice system. This assault on her civil liberties subjected her to the daily heartbreak of a broken promise of procedural justice for close to eleven short years. 
What is clear as day is that the institutions of the state failed Aileen. The social services system failed her insofar as it did not provide her with the resources that she needed to break the cycle of violence and poverty that her abusive and neglectful household trapped her in. The healthcare system failed her insofar as it did not address her history of mental illness, substance abuse, and physical health problems. The education system failed her insofar as it did not provide her with academic support and proper schooling. These institutions that are designed to protect, uplift, provide care, support, and guidance to the most vulnerable members of society, instead perpetuated the injustices that led to Aileen’s tragic end.
Of course, an interlocuter might suggest, as many scholars have, that focusing so heavily on the obligations of institutions shifts the responsibility away from individuals for their actions.  In such cases, individuals might never be held accountable, and we might not be able to have a functional mechanism of punishment in society.  However, it is exactly for this reason that Nussbaum emphasizes the importance of rehabilitation and reintegration into society.  She argues that punitive approaches to criminal justice, such as imprisonment and the death penalty, often fail to address the underlying social and psychological factors that contribute to criminal behavior.  She advocates for an alternative mechanism of restorative justice than Locke’s, one that focuses on repairing harm, addressing the needs of victims and offenders, and promoting social reconciliation.  As such, her Capabilities Approach evaluates institutions based on how well they provide resources to enhance humans’ capabilities such that we can then move forward to effectively holding individuals responsible for their actions.  She draws an important distinction between three types of resources to enhance one’s capabilities: basic resources, expansive resources, and moral resources.  Basic resources entail housing, food, and shelter.  Expansive resources entail education and healthcare.  Moral resources entail those opportunities that allow individuals to exercise their autonomy as moral agents.  Thus, Nussbaum argues that institutions are obligated to enhance all three resources for the purpose of facilitating individuals’ ability to actualize themselves. 
It is thus clear that the United States must undertake a comprehensive and intersectional assessment of the criminal justice system, to ensure procedural and substantive justice for all by way of considering mitigating circumstances in the sentencing process. The potential abolition of the death penalty should be carefully considered in this context, as part of a broader effort to root out the institutional biases that have long undermined the fairness and impartiality of the criminal justice system. The road ahead may be long and arduous, but with principled commitment, a reformist spirit, and an unflagging commitment to justice, America can and must create a criminal justice system that is truly worthy of the name.

References

Anonymous. “18 U.S. Code §3592 - Mitigating and Aggravating Factors.” Part II - Criminal Procedure, Title 18, Chapter 228 - Death Sentence, U.S. House of Representatives, 1984, https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=%2Fprelim%40title18%2Fpart2%2Fchapter228&edition=prelim. 
Anonymous. “Aggravating and Mitigating Factors.” Explanatory Materials, Sentencing Council U.K., n.d., https://www.sentencingcouncil.org.uk/explanatory-material/magistrates-court/item/aggravating-and-mitigating-factors/. 
Anonymous. “Crime of Passion.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, n.d., https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/crime_of_passion. 
Anonymous. “If You Are Not at the Table Then You’re Probably on the Menu.” Quote Investigator, 16 Nov. 2020, https://quoteinvestigator.com/2020/11/15/table-menu/.
Anonymous. “Mitigating Factor.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, n.d., https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/mitigating_factor. 
Anonymous. “Samuel Little: Confessions of a Killer.” News Stories, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 6 Oct. 2019, https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/samuel-little-most-prolific-serial-killer-in-us-history-100619. 
Anonymous. “The True Measure of Any Society Can Be Found in How It Treats Its Most Vulnerable Members.” U.K. Blog, Volunteering Matters, 14 Dec. 2016, https://volunteeringmatters.org.uk/true-measure-society-can-found-treats-vulnerable-members/.
Becker, Mary. “Patriarchy and Inequality: Towards a Substantive Feminism.” University of Chicago Legal Forum, vol. 1999, no. 1, art. 3, 1999, https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1266&context=uclf
Bindel, Julie. “Aileen Wuornos Was No Monster.” Review, UnHerd, 14 Nov. 2020, https://unherd.com/2020/11/aileen-wuornos-was-no-monster/. 
Brison, Susan J. “‘The Price We Pay’? Pornography and Harm.” Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics, edited by Andrew I. Cohen and Christopher Heath Wellman, 2nd ed., Wiley Blackwell, Chichester, 2014, Contemporary Debates in Philosophy Series.
Busby, John C. “M’Naghten Rule.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 9 June 2022, https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/m%27naghten_rule. 
Clark, Margaret E. “The Immutable Command Meets the Unknowable Mind: Deifific Decree Claims and the Insanity Defense after People v. Serravo.” Denver Law Review, vol. 70, no. 1, art. 11, Jan. 1992, https://digitalcommons.du.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2320&context=dlr. 
Clausewitz, Carl von, and Brodie, Bernard. “Chapter One, Section 24, War Is Merely the Continuation of Policy by Other Means.” On War, Book One: On the Nature of War, edited by Michael Howard, translated by Peter Paret, Indexed ed., Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 1989.
Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 6.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 8.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé W. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” Feminist Legal Theory, vol. 1989, no. 1, art. 8, 1989, https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1052&context=uclf
Davis, Angela Y., and Cassandra Shaylor. “Race, Gender, and the Prison Industrial Complex: California and Beyond.” Meridians, vol. 2, no. 1, 2001, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/40338793. 
Denno, Deborah W. “Gender, Crime, and the Criminal Law Defenses.” The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1973-), vol. 85, no. 1, 1994, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1144115. 
Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter One, What is Law?” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. 
Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter Seven, Integrity in Law.” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. 
Eckenroth, D. “Wealthy Justice: The Role Wealth Plays in Sentencing and in the Affluenza Defense.” New England Journal on Criminal and Civil Confinement, vol. 41, no. 2, 2015.
Goldfarb, Phyllis. “Matters of Strata: Race, Gender, and Class Structures in Capital Cases.” Washington and Lee Law Review, vol. 73, no. 3, art. 11, 1 June 2016, https://scholarlycommons.law.wlu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4514&context=wlulr. 
Green, Michael S. “Legal Realism as Theory of Law.” William & Mary Law Review, vol. 46, no. 6, 1 Apr. 2005. https://scholarship.law.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1299&context=wmlr. 
Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter V, Law as the Union of Primary and Secondary Rules.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. 
Heagney, Meredith. “Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg Offers Critique of Roe v. Wade During Law School Visit.” The Law School, University of Chicago, 15 May 2013, https://www.law.uchicago.edu/news/justice-ruth-bader-ginsburg-offers-critique-roe-v-wade-during-law-school-visit. 
Heberle, Renée. “Disciplining Gender; Or, Are Women Getting Away with Murder?” Signs, vol. 24, no. 4, 1999, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3175607. 
Hohfeld, Wesley Newcomb. Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning, 1st ed., Yale University Press, New Haven, NH, 1964.
Ishak, Natasha. “Meet Marianne Bachmeier, Germany’s ‘Revenge Mother’ Who Shot Her Child’s Killer in The Middle of His Trial.” Edited by Bernadette Giacomazzo, News, All That’s Interesting, 22 June 2021, https://allthatsinteresting.com/marianne-bachmeier. 
Jacobsen, Carol, and Lora Bex Lempert. “Institutional Disparities: Considerations of Gender in the Commutation Process for Incarcerated Women.” Signs, vol. 39, no. 1, 2013, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.1086/670772.
King, Martin Luther. “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” California State University, Aug. 1963, https://www.csuchico.edu/iege/_assets/documents/susi-letter-from-birmingham-jail.pdf.
Lippke, Richard L. “Thinking About Private Prisons.” Criminal Justice Ethics, vol. 16, no. 1, 1997, https://doi.org/10.1080/0731129x.1997.9992025. 
Locke, John. “Chapter II, Of the State of Nature.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. 
Locke, John. “Chapter VI, Of Paternal Power.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980.
Macleod, Marlee. “Aileen Wuornos: Killer Who Preyed on Truck Drivers.” Unrepentant, Crime Library, n.d., https://www.crimelibrary.org/notorious_murders/women/wuornos/11.html. 
Mahdawi, Arwa. “Rape Culture Is as American as Apple Pie.” Opinion, The Guardian News and Media, 21 Sept. 2019, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/sep/21/culture-american-apple-pie-week-in-patriarchy. 
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. “The Communist Manifesto.” Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 and the Communist Manifesto, translated by Martin Milligan, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY, 1988, Great Books in Philosophy Series.
Nussbaum, Martha C. “Chapter Two, Adaptive Preferences and Women’s Options.” Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach, Revised ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, GB, 2001, The Seeley Lectures, Series Number 3.
Nussbaum, Martha C. “Part I: Justice; Chapter 2: The Feminist Critique of Liberalism.” Sex and Social Justice, Oxford University Press, Oxford, GB, 2000. 
Ostertag, Gary. “Cruelty and Kinds: Scalia and Dworkin on the Constitutionality of Capital Punishment.” Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, vol. 61, no. 4, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174x.2017.1371875.
Pak, Eudie. “Infamous Serial Killers: Samuel Little.” Biography.com, A&E Networks Television, 7 Apr. 2020, https://www.biography.com/crime/samuel-little.
Pateman, Carole. “Chapter I, Contracting In.” The Sexual Contract, 30th Anniversary ed., Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 2018.
Pazzanese, Christina. “How Rape Culture Shapes Whether a Survivor Is Believed.” National & World Affairs, Harvard Gazette, 26 Aug. 2020, https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/08/how-rape-culture-shapes-whether-a-survivor-is-believed/. 
Powell, Andrea. “Cyntoia Brown’s Clemency Must Begin a #MeToo Movement for Unacknowledged Sex Trafficking Survivors.” Think: Opinion, Analysis, Essays, NBCUniversal News Group, 8 Jan. 2019, https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/cyntoia-brown-s-clemency-must-begin-metoo-movement-unacknowledged-sex-ncna956101. 
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 4: The Zombie in the Brain.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Rawls, John. “Chapter II: The Principles of Justice, Section 14.” A Theory of Justice. Revised ed., The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1999.
Reiman, Jeffrey H., and Paul Leighton. “Chapter 4, To the Vanquished Belong the Spoils: Who Is Winning the Losing War against Crime?” The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison Thinking Critically About Class and Criminal Justice, 10th ed., Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon, GB, 2022.
Sáez, Gemma, et al. “The Role of Interpersonal Sexual Objectification in Heterosexual Intimate Partner Violence from Perspectives of Perceivers and Targets.” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, vol. 37, no. 3-4, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260520922348.
Shakespeare, William. “Act II, Scene 2: The Debate between Justice and Mercy.” Measure for Measure, Macmillan, London, GB, 1971.
Shepard, Jessica H. “The Uneven Scales of Lady Justice.” Knowledge Box, Georgia College and State University, 2017, https://kb.gcsu.edu/src/2017/friday/89/. 
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 30 Jan. 2023.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 12 Apr. 2023.
Smith, Victoria L. “Highways of Desolation: The Road and Trash in ‘Boys Don’t Cry’ and ‘Monster.’” South Central Review, vol. 32, no. 2, 2015, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/44016895.
Supreme Court of Colorado. “The People of the State of Colorado, Petitioner, v. Robert Pasqual Serravo, Respondent.” Google Scholar, U.S. Judicial Branch, 13 Jan. 1992, https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=14452676898616909394&q=people+v+serravo&hl=en&as_sdt=40006. 
Supreme Court of Florida. “Wuornos v. State.” Justia, U.S. Judicial Branch, 22 Sept. 1994, https://law.justia.com/cases/florida/supreme-court/1994/79484-0.html. 
United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. “James Eugene Bigby, Petitioner-Appellant, v. Doug Dretke, Director, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, Institutional Division, Respondent-Appellee.” Google Scholar, U.S. Judicial Branch, 8 Mar. 2005, https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=11188742386507317984&q=bigby+v+dretke&hl=en&as_sdt=40006.
United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. “Cyntoia Brown v. Carolyn Jordan, No. 16-6738.” Justia, U.S. Judicial Branch, 1 Aug. 2018, https://cases.justia.com/federal/appellate-courts/ca6/16-6738/16-6738-2018-08-02.pdf?ts=1533222017. 
United States District Court, Northern District of Florida, Tallahassee Division. “Pernell v. Florida Board of Governors.” ACLU, U.S. Judicial Branch, 17 Nov. 2022, https://www.aclu.org/wp-content/uploads/legal-documents/pernell_pi_order_0.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Furman v. Georgia; Mr. Justice Marshall, Concurring.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 29 June 1972, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep408/usrep408238/usrep408238.pdf.
United States Supreme Court. “Kahler v. Kansas” SCOTUS.gov, U.S. Judicial Branch, 23 Mar. 2020, https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/19pdf/18-6135_j4ek.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Lockett v. Ohio.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 3 July 1978, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep438/usrep438586/usrep438586.pdf.
United States Supreme Court. “Penry v. Lynaugh, Director, Texas Department of Corrections.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 26 June 1989, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep492/usrep492302/usrep492302.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Rosenberg et al. v. United States.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 19 June 1953, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep346/usrep346322/usrep346322.pdf.
United States Supreme Court. “Strickland, Superintendent, Florida State Prison, et al. v. Washington.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 14 May 1984, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep466/usrep466668/usrep466668.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Tennard v. Dretke, Director, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, Correctional Institutions Division.” Justia, U.S. Judicial Branch, 24 June 2004, https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/542/274/case.pdf.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part II, Selected Case Studies of Female Serial Killers and Accomplices in the Twentieth Century – Chapter 3, The Cult and Passion of Aileen Wuornos: The Post-Modern Female Serial Killer.” Female Serial Killers How and Why Women Become Monsters. Berkley Books, 7 Aug. 2007.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part II, Serial Killer Chronicles: The Early Forensic History of Monsters – Chapter 13, American Gothic: The “Golden Age” of Serial Killers, 1950–2000.” Sons of Cain: A History of Serial Killers from the Stone Age to the Present. Berkley Books, 14 Aug. 2018.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part Two, The Method and Madness – Chapter 4, The Evolution of Monstrosity:  Visionary Missionary Hedonist Power-Assertive Anger-Retaliatory Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy Serial Spree Killers and Other Emerging Categories.” Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters. Berkley Books, 5 Oct. 2004.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part Two, The Method and Madness – Chapter 7, The Serial Murderer’s First Kill: Triggers, Facilitators, Detective Magazines, Paraphilic Hard Porn and The Bible.” Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters. Berkley Books, 5 Oct. 2004.
Waldman, Ellen A., and Lola Akin Ojelabi. “Mediators and Substantive Justice: A View from Rawls’ Original Position.” Thomas Jefferson School of Law, Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution, vol. 30, no. 3, 19 Sept. 2016, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/161947317.pdf.
Williams, Garrath. “‘Infrastructures of Responsibility’: The Moral Tasks of Institutions.” Journal of Applied Philosophy, vol. 23, no. 2, 2006, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/24355124.
Zarrell, Matt, and Ella Torres. “‘Affluenza Teen’ Ethan Couch to Be Released as His Lawyers Argue Testing Will Show He Didn’t Violate Parole.” News, ABC Network, 3 Jan. 2020, https://abcnews.go.com/US/affluenza-teen-ethan-couch-arrested-probation-violation/story?id=68036264. 