Rollins College

The D[evil]ution of Democracies into Dictatorships:
A Philosophical Inquiry into the Erosion of Institutional Integrity and the Ills of Humanity

Jiya Manchanda
PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen
Dr. Eric Smaw
May 9, 2023

The less a person knows about the workings of the institutions in his society, the more he must trust those who wield power in it; and the more he trusts those who wield such power, the more vulnerable he makes himself to becoming their victim…  [because] all political institutions are manifestations and materializations of power; they petrify and decay as soon as the living power of the people ceases to uphold them.  [After all,] every great institution is the lengthened shadow of [each] man; his character determines the character of the [franchise]. 

In this view, and in accordance with Aristotle’s Politics, democracies and like institutions are endowed with the fundamental purpose of promoting and cultivating “eudaimonia,” i.e., human flourishing, by instilling the virtues in their citizens.  As such, the state is not just a mere aggregation of individuals,  but an organic, dynamic entity where each person plays an indispensable role in shaping its collective destiny.  Consequently, the state’s virtue is inextricably linked to the virtuous character of its constituents.  However, from ancient myths to contemporary horror films, monster stories have long served as cautionary tales, highlighting the persistent frailty of the human experience toward moral fallibility,  and the potential for individuals and societies to devolve into destructive forces insofar as they tolerate evil.  In Shakespeare’s words, “hell is empty, and all the devils are here.”  It is this very vulnerability that poses a grave threat to the very fabric of democracy. 
Alas, what is at stake today in 21st century democracies like the United States is not just the policy preferences of the people,  but the institutions themselves that have empowered us “to form a more perfect Union.”  Ever since the birth of the United States, generations have had to “defend [the Constitution], protect it, preserve it, choose it, for that is what democracy is: it’s a choice – a decision of the people, by the people, and for the people.”  Democracy ebbs and flows, going unnoticed, until one day, it doesn’t, and the world sits by wondering why.  That day will arrive,  and when it does, it will neither be the result of passive degradation,  nor constitutional retrogression;  rather, it would be the culmination of a series of conscious choices made to assault the principles upon which our country was founded.  Unless we wake up and act today, we risk losing everything we hold dear.
In what follows, I will offer substantial philosophical, jurisprudential, and pragmatic analyses of the history and traditions of democracies for the purpose of illustrating how they can be saved from devolving into dictatorships. Ultimately, I argue that democracies like ours have the potential to devolve into dictatorships like Nazi Germany in a twofold manner: primarily, through the erosion of institutional integrity, and secondarily, through the ills of humanity plaguing individuals, as seen through zombies, serial killers, madmen, and sleepy. In so doing, I posit that it is incumbent upon governments to methodically reinstate their institutions with democratic norms and principles, as well as for individuals to engage in moral development, such that we can establish both internal and external mechanisms of accountability. After all, as Bob Proctor posited, “accountability is the glue that ties commitment to the result.” 
Prima facie, let’s establish our conception of individuals. According to V. S. Ramachandran’s Neuro-Bio-Chemical Theory of Consciousness, insofar as individuals possess stability of perception,  are able to make choices,  and have memory,  as well as have neurons firing in a synchronized manner at 40 Hz,  they are conscious.  When this consciousness is coupled with rational capacities, i.e., the ability to reason,  individuals can engage in recursive functions.  Here, recursion refers to

… the ability to embed our thoughts within other thoughts… to take its own output as the next input, a loop that can be extended indefinitely to create sequences or structures of unbounded length… 

This capacity enables human beings to think abstractly, develop complex theories, and engage in decision-making processes that take into account multiple factors and possible outcomes.  Insofar as this is the case, humans can be considered inherently equal and independent agents, capable of autonomy.  18th century political philosopher John Locke identifies, in his Second Treatise, that this grants individuals the natural rights to life, liberty, bodily integrity, and property. 
In accordance with the law of nature, i.e., reason,  people realize they cannot protect these rights on their own.  They subsequently contract into civil society, wherein they divulge their absolute freedom of being their own judge, jury, and executioner when someone violates these natural rights, unto a democratic government.  It is in this manner that they are able to ensure survival from the state of nature, which at best is plagued by insecurity,  and at worst, can be “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,”  with individuals existing in a state of “continuall feare, and danger of violent death.” 
The most fundamental cornerstone of such democracies as the U.S. government is the division and separation of powers,  a “tripartite system” derived from Enlightenment political philosopher Baron de Montesquieu, that distributes political authority among an executive (head of the armed forces and executer of law ), a legislature (representatives of the people that pass laws), and a judiciary (adjudicator of conflicts between institutions and interpreter of the Constitution through judicial review).  These three branches of government must perform their own separate functions  for a legitimate system of checks and balances to subsist,  which Founding Father James Madison codified in Federalist Papers 47,  and 51.  According to this system, each institution limits the power of the other two to prevent either from exercising undue influence over both the other branches  and the citizenry.  The United States Constitution, the “supreme Law of the Land,”  is the founding document into which checks and balances are embedded, be they the courts assessing the constitutionality of legislative bills,  the bicameral Congress curbing legislative dominance,  the impeachment authority to inhibit abuses of power,  the Presidential veto limiting congressional overreach,  or the Senate’s role in non-self-executing treaties checking the executive.  Each of these mechanisms works in tandem to organize a democracy that requires participation,  presumes disagreement,  and is grounded on institutions that are both “trustworthy and trusted.”  
Trust, then, is the bedrock of sound public governance and healthy institutions.  Insofar as entities abide by laws that are equally applied to everyone in accordance with the social contract’s caveat of “truth and keeping of the faith,”  they are operating within the widely accepted Rule of Law:  

… a set of principles or ideals for ensuring an orderly and just society… where everyone is held accountable to the same laws, there are clear and fair processes for enforcing laws, there is an independent judiciary, and human rights are guaranteed for all. 

H. L. A. Hart furthered the notion of legitimate order in legal systems through his rule of recognition, which holds special importance in a democracy.  The rule of recognition is a pedigree test that provides the criteria of legal validity by determining which laws are legitimate and which are not.  According to it,

… enactments by the Queen in Parliament are not law because of their moral credentials, or because of any logical presupposition, but because an actually practiced customary rule recognizes them as such… [they] have an internal aspect involving a complex attitude Hart calls acceptance, i.e., a willingness to use the regularity as a standard to guide and appraise behavior, especially to commend conformity and criticize breaches, and to treat such commendation and criticism as appropriate. Acceptance does not require approval; It is not a matter of how people feel about the rule but of their willingness to use it, either by consent or tacitly, by assenting to it. 

This legal authority is one we find in Article VII of the U.S. Constitution: in ratifying this social contract, states, and thereby American citizens, expressly consented to acting in accordance with it. 
Importantly, Ronald Dworkin argues, in Law’s Empire, that law is a social construct resulting from such institutions.  He builds on Hart’s analysis by drawing an important distinction between primary rules,  secondary rules,  and legal principles,  for the purpose of demonstrating that law itself is a union of these components.  Primary rules guide behavior by imposing duties or conferring powers upon people;  whereas secondary rules explain the scope and function of primary rules,  provide ways to alter them,  and outline how to adjudicate them.  Together, primary and secondary rules constitute procedural justice, i.e., due process, which evaluates individuals equally before the law.  This includes the defendant’s right to an attorney, a “speedy and public trial,” an “impartial jury” of their peers, and so on. 
However, some laws written in blackletter can fail to capture the full extent of justice, and abiding by them may result in an outcome that “shocks the conscience… of the people.”  Such cases exist in the so-called penumbra, and must be adjudicated using principles of law, such as equality, liberty, privacy, and so on.  In applying these principles and accounting for the context of a case, courts are able to uphold substantive justice, i.e., fairness, such that the guilty are punished and the innocent go free.  Thus, judicial decisions are justifiable insofar as and up until they uphold both procedural and substantive justice. 
The Lockean criminal justice system stands as a testament to the state’s unwavering obligation to ensuring that the social contract remains unbroken by way of punishing violations of primary or secondary rules.  Locke’s focus on reparations and restraint as components of restorative justice elucidates offenders’ duty toward their wider community.  For him, the purpose of reparations is to make amends for the wrongdoing committed;  while restraint serves a twofold objective, the first of which is to deter the person who committed the crime from recidivistic behavior.  The second purpose is to deter others from committing similar crimes, such that society at large would be better off.  This notion echoes his broader political philosophy that emphasizes the importance of accountability. 
However, the fortitude of such institutions does not render them immune from downfall. Monster stories serve as a metaphor to allow for a deeper exploration of societal or intellectual dilemmas through both fear and excitement,  while the “monstrous” qualities of the characters represent a lack of morality and unrestrained behavior on the part of humans.  The zombie apocalypse has long represented such a collapse of civilization, where the rules and norms that previously governed our interactions with one another break down, leading to a world in which we must fend for ourselves without thinking, and our survival becomes the only thing that matters.  This story, then, serves as a reminder about the fragility of social order, and the importance of maintaining institutions like the criminal justice system that accurately assess the varying degrees of individual responsibility, rather than prosecuting everybody equivalently. 
Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness poignantly reveals the nature of real zombies for the purpose of demonstrating that humans themselves can be likened to the same.  He posits the notion of neurological zombies, i.e., non-conscious beings that exist at the nexus of the evolved and unevolved brains within each of us.  These entities possess a stability of perception akin to conscious entities and exhibit high levels of alertness and skill in performing complex movements.  However, they lack the capacity for fully voluntary decision-making, and are limited to de-facto choices.  Additionally, they are unable to form new memories and can only access previously formed memories.  This non-conscious zombie state of being arises from the firing of neurons in the brain between 17 and 39 Hz, which are not synchronized in a manner that would give rise to a conscious experience.  The elucidation of the existence of neurological zombies has illuminated various previously enigmatic phenomena, such as the occurrence of habitual actions, reflexes, and other instinctual behaviors that unfold subtly beyond the ambit of conscious awareness. 
Given that these neurological zombies within us are primarily driven by external stimuli rather than internal goals or intentions,  they lack the capacity for autonomous decision-making,  which is a notion we can better understand by looking to the case of Kenneth Parks.  On the night that Parks smashed his mother-in-law Barbara Woods’ brain with a tire iron and strangled his father-in-law Donald, he performed a series of actions that he had no recollection of.  Despite not having any motive to harm them, Parks set out from his house by putting on his shoes, picking up his car keys, leaving the front door of his house open, leaving his garage door open, and driving 23 km through the streets of Toronto to his in-laws’ house:  indicating that his “how” pathway governing his spatial orientation was intact.  It was later discovered that Parks had been sleep-deprived for 48 hours, was undergoing major physical stress from playing rugby on a hot day while out of shape, and was dealing with significant emotional stress from his gambling debt, which was putting a strain on his marriage. 
The next morning, Parks walked into a police station to confess that he thought he had killed someone;  the officers keenly observed that he had accidentally cut off the tendons of all his fingers, yet did not appear to be in any pain,  indicating that his “what” pathway governing his ability to identify sensory experiences was temporarily suspended.  However, it is important to note that these neurological zombies are not necessarily dangerous. They might be violent, in rare instances as such, but for the most part, they guide normal automatic human behavior, be it our knee jerk reflexes,  driving for long periods of time,  and even allowing us blindsight to navigate dark rooms.  So, the zombies within us can neither physically be stopped from the actions they commit when in their non-conscious state,  nor should they be held accountable as if they voluntarily engaged in those actions. 
In this regard, one of the most significant principles that underlies Locke’s democratic criminal justice system is the notion of punishment being “proportionate to [the] transgression” committed.  For this reason, the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has since emerged, conferring upon citizens an important negative right,  i.e., the freedom from “excessive… cruel and unusual punishments.”  The United States Supreme Court, too, ever vigilant of this constitutionally enshrined mandate for fundamental respect of human dignity, has consistently held that pertinent information regarding the defendant’s age, prior criminal record, character, state of mind, and disability, alongside the nature and particulars of the offense committed, must be presented at trial.  This practice of considering circumstances that might mitigate criminal culpability is consistent with Dworkin’s jurisprudence, wherein the purpose of such examination is to ensure that a principled and equitable sentence is meted out, one that is tempered by the distinctive contextual nuances of a case, and for the purpose of potentially alleviating the severity of a sentence.  As such, accounting for the offender’s capacity to be held responsible, and thereby their degree of blameworthiness, would uphold both procedural and substantive justice.
In Parks’ case, clinicists testified to his state of neurological non-consciousness at the time of the killing, which led to his defense of “non-insane automatism.”  This asserts that a person ought not be held criminally liable or responsible for their actions if they are entirely involuntary and beyond their control,  even if the person is not classified as legally insane under the M’Naghten Rule.  The defense was accepted by the court, who acknowledged the fact that Parks’ heteronomous state would necessarily have prevented him from forming the guilty intent for the crimes that he inadvertently and involuntarily committed, known as mens rea;  they ruled that Parks could not have acted otherwise.  As such, mechanisms of adjudicating the various degrees of responsibility are a means to safeguarding democratic institutions that engage in both equitable and justifiable sentencing. 
Conversely, when laws do not account for evidence highlighting heteronomous activity, and regard all individuals as though they are always autonomous, they risk violating the principles of fairness and proportionality, thereby meting out “excessive punishment[s].”  If such miscarriages of substantive justice occur frequently, they could erode public trust in the criminal justice system, and lead to a breakdown in the legitimacy of democratic institutions.  In the absence of such legitimacy, individuals are at a heightened vulnerability of succumbing to the allure of authoritarian regimes, which pledge to reinstate order and stability at any expense, even if that entails infringing upon fundamental human rights and civil liberties. 
However, democracies are at a risk of devolution for reasons beyond the erosion of institutional integrity. The ills of humanity that plague individuals undermine their ability to participate in these institutions of the state as mentally healthy adult human beings.  It is for this reason that monster stories have come to play a significant role in informing us about the darker aspects of human nature, such as ignorance, hatred, and violence.  Historically, newspapers have played an important role in publishing metaphorical accounts of monsters, aiming to enlighten readers about dangerous activity in the local area.  During the 19th century, for instance, they disseminated chilling stories of notorious monsters, in one case alluding to Jack the Ripper, who stalked the streets of London, to alert the public to urban crime, such as rape and serial murder. 
Peter Vronsky identifies serial killers as those individuals who have committed three or more murders over a period of time, with a “cooling off” period in between each killing.  He elucidates several characteristics that are common among serial killers who murder in such cycles, be they organized, disorganized, or mixed-styled.  These include a lack of empathy, a need for power and control, and a tendency toward sadism,  suggesting that sexual gratification, revenge, and a desire for attention or recognition are potential motivations behind the behavior.  Importantly, while we cannot determine a standardized cause for serial murder, we can discern that serial killers cannot possibly be neurological zombies. Each of the above features, which entail urges to kill that can intensify over time,  and the ability to maintaining a “normal” façade between cycles,  requires consciousness. Such murderers necessarily possess a stability of perception,  voluntary choice,  and a memory of their actions. 
Vronsky argues that certain groups of people are perceived as degraded in modern culture, media, and society,  and are consequently targeted by homicidal psychopaths who seek to fulfill their increasingly addictive perverse and sexual fantasies through serial killing.  He notes that the victims of serial killers often include minorities and individuals who are homeless or impoverished: groups typically seen as society’s “throwaways.”  In this view, serial murder “… is [sexually] pleasurable [to perpetrators] precisely because it is degrading to others.” 
Such was the case of Ilse Koch, popularly known as the “Bitch of Buchenwald,”  who was a “hedonist lust” type of serial killer, one that killed for the purpose of harvesting body parts through some form of compulsive sexual deviance.  A 41-year-old woman with “red hair, green eyes, and a buxom[ly] figure,” Koch was put on trial in 1947 for her crimes committed at the Buchenwald concentration camp in Nazi Germany during the Holocaust.  She had started her career in the Nazi Party as a secretary, and was later assigned to the Sachsenhausen concentration camp near Berlin in 1936.  During her time as the camp commandant’s wife, it was alleged that she would select newly arriving Jewish and differently-abled inmates based on the tattoos she liked, subsequently ordering their killing, skinning, and the creation of household artifacts like lampshades, photo album covers, handbags, and gloves from their tattooed skin.  Furthermore, her house at the concentration camp was said to have contained light switches made from human thumb bones and furniture, and decorations made from body parts and shrunken heads.  She was accused of murdering approximately forty inmates for this purpose. 
A similar case was that of Irma Grese, the so-called “Beast of Belsen.”  As a young blonde woman, Grese was a SS (Schutzstaffel Nazi paramilitary) “Aufseherin” or matron in the concentration camp system during World War II.  Such women were not members of the SS, but rather paid female employees who served as auxiliary workers.  Witnesses reported that she would be present on the ramp when Mengele, known as the “Angel of Death,” used to select individuals for the gas chambers.  Grese would brutally beat and kick people who attempted to bypass the selection or switch lines afterward.  Additionally, she had a fixation on women with large breasts and would whip them to the point of infection.  She would often be present during the medical treatment of these injuries, “swaying back and forth with a glassy-eyed look as the inmates cried in pain.” 
As aforementioned, Locke’s conception of inalienable human rights entails that people have the right to live their lives as they see fit, as long as they do not harm others.  It is evident, then, that both Ilse Koch and Irma Grese consciously and voluntarily chose to engage in a sadistic form of serial killing that involved a sexual component, targeting individuals who were already deemed subhuman by the Nazi regime.  It is worth noting that these women were not simply “following orders” when they committed acts of abuse and murder against their victims.  Their actions went beyond what was expected of them to the point where even the SS believed they were “freelancing.”  Serial killers like these women, then, are willing to cross the boundaries of their liberty to exercise license, i.e., their own will over the lives of others,  underscoring the moral depravity and malicious intent behind their actions.  Their intentional lack of respect for Jewish people’s humanity serves as a reminder of how susceptible we are to the ills of humanity, be they hatred, violence, or lust. These cases highlight the importance of developing one’s own moral compass and the role that empathy and compassion play in ensuring that we treat others with the dignity that they deserve.
Importantly, though this behavior was condemned upon the prosecution of Nazis at the Nuremberg Trials, Ilse Koch and Irma Grese’s actions were legal at the time at which they committed them.  Vronsky himself is doubtful of whether serial killers “would have committed the atrocities they did if they were not introduced [to] and prepared for it by the state.”  The Nuremberg laws made it permissible to take the lives of Jews;  concentration camps were designed to suppress any empathy that the guards may have had toward the inmates, stripping them of their ability to perceive the prisoners as anything other than “enemies of the state;”  Auschwitz was an environment where killing was normalized.  As such, it is evident that the institutions of formerly democratic Germany had been perverted by the time the Holocaust began, into that of a dictatorship.  There, the actions of serial killers like Ilse Koch and Irma Grese were not only state-sanctioned,  but also encouraged insofar as the women were appointed to their respective positions for the very purpose of executing mass murder. 
Serial killers like Koch and Grese, however, cannot successfully carry out such behavior without serious consequences, but for permission from “madmen:” authoritarians like Adolf Hitler.  The Madman Theory, a shrewd political tactic, posits that a leader, especially one in a position of power, can wield influence over adversaries by projecting an air of irrationality, unpredictability, and volatility.  This calculated maneuver is distinctly Machiavellian, as the Italian philosopher argued in 1517: “it is a very wise thing to simulate craziness at the right time.”  The strategy seeks to persuade opponents that the leader is capable of nearly anything, even extreme actions, such as military offensives, to gain an upper hand in negotiations or other political endeavors.  Its core tenet is to intimidate or instill fear in the opposition, ultimately compelling them to yield or back down from their position. 
The Madman Theory initially surfaced during the Nixon era in American politics, where it was purported that the President and his advisors strategically engineered an image of Nixon as impulsive and erratic to gain leverage in negotiations with the Soviet Union and North Vietnam. 

I call it the Madman Theory, Bob. I want the North Vietnamese to believe that I’ve reached the point that I might do anything to stop the war. We’ll just slip the word to them that… “Nixon is obsessed about Communism. We can’t restrain him when he is angry – and he has his hand on the nuclear button” – and Ho Chi Minh himself will be in Paris in two days begging for peace. 

The subsequent U.S. bombing of Cambodia, which Secretary of State Henry Kissinger portrayed as a manifestation of Nixon’s supposed instability,  led to its “civilian casualties” that

… drove an enraged populace into the arms of an insurgency that had enjoyed relatively little support until the bombing began, setting in motion the expansion of the Vietnam War deeper into Cambodia, a coup d’état in 1970, the rapid rise of the Khmer Rouge, and ultimately the Cambodian genocide. 

Former President Donald Trump’s approach to foreign diplomacy has been described by some as a contemporary illustration of the Madman Theory.  His behavior toward both ally and adversary nations appears to fit this model.  During the KORUS Foreign Trade Agreement renegotiations, for instance, Trump instructed U.S. trade negotiators to inform South Korean diplomats that “if they don’t give the concessions [immediately], this crazy guy will pull out of the deal.”  This was likely an attempt to intimidate them by projecting an image of irrationality and unpredictability.  Also, in his interactions with North Korea, he often employed bellicose rhetoric and threatened the use of military force,  which Jim Sciutto argues was a deliberate tactic to intimidate the North Korean regime and force them to make concessions. 
Still, Roseanne McManus has argued that Hitler has perhaps been the most effective “madman” insofar as his approach to dictatorial rule in Nazi Germany was “situational,” i.e., limited to particular circumstances or issue areas, and employed “extreme preferences.”  In the Sudetenland Crisis and subsequently in the Holocaust, for example, his use of the Gestapo, concentration camps, and the SS were all deliberate attempts to project an image of brutality and unpredictability.  In 1936, Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, referred to Hitler as a “mad dictator,”  and two years later, on September 3, 1938, he expressed his concern that “the fate of hundreds of millions depends on one man and he is half mad.”  Similarly, British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax told a US representative in August 1938 that Hitler was “for all practical purposes… a madman.”  Moreover, in September 1938, British Ambassador Nevile Henderson wrote that Hitler was “driven by megalomania,”  that he may have “crossed the border-line of insanity,”  and that

Hitler’s sense of values is so abnormal that any argument seems powerless… His capacity for self-deception and his incapacity to see any point which does not meet his own case are fantastic. 

His rise to power in Germany saw the complete perversion of the institutions of the state.  When Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in 1933, he and his Nazi Party immediately began to take steps to dismantle democracy and establish a dictatorship. 
We find the quasi-mechanism for this power in Thomas Hobbes’ seminal work, Leviathan, wherein governmental power is unified in a sovereign, i.e., “an effective and efficient executive that is able to protect the safety of the people and avoid anarchy.”  In the Hobbesian conception, a hierarchy of status exists between the sovereign and his subjects, such that the latter lay down their arms in submission to the former, who provides closure to the regress of political authority.  The people place their trust in the sovereign, which then serves as a substitute for constitutional constraints;  no checks and balances are instituted to limit the power of the sovereign.  
To consolidate this power, Hitler restructured the German military by appointing supporters to the newly created post of the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, and purged officers suspected of being disloyal.  He established new government agencies, such as the Gestapo, to enforce Nazi policies, and gave them broad powers.  Hitler also passed laws to centralize power, including the Enabling Act of 1933, which allowed him to make laws without parliamentary approval.  Further, he abolished trade unions and other organizations that could challenge his authority.  Given that the people had forfeited their absolute liberty in exchange for the protection of their life, Hobbes’ sovereign, in this case Hitler, was inherently paternalistic.  This “interference of [the] state… with an individual… motivated by a claim that the person interfered with will be better off,”  has subverted what Hobbes originally designed as a social contract,  into what we have contemporarily come to recognize as the regime of a dictator. 
Under this conception, laws can be interpreted as commands that citizens are obliged to follow.  These commands are consonant with those behavioristically articulated by J. L. Austin in his seminal work, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined, i.e., orders backed by the threat of force or sanction.  Here, it is the imperative nature of the laws that fosters habitual obedience,  one that philosophers and legal scholars alike have condemned as a form of governmental overreach.  Ultimately, in a dictatorship, the promise of government protection for citizens becomes subverted into the protection of the majority and oppression of the minority. 
The 1935 Nuremberg Laws were a significant set of such anti-Semitic laws enacted in Nazi Germany, which stripped Jews of their citizenship and civil rights.  This legislation established “racial purity,” outlawing marriage and sexual relations between Aryans and Jews.  They not only violated procedural justice by subjecting Jews to structural discrimination, forced labor, and property confiscation without due process,  but also violated substantive justice by creating a framework for further perverse policies that included the Kristallnacht Pogrom of 1938.  This involved the destruction of Jewish businesses, homes, and synagogues, as well as their subsequent deportation to ghettos and concentration camps.  As such, the Nuremberg Laws paved the way for the systematic genocide of millions of Jews during the Holocaust. 
Now, there are times at which the state deems it necessary to abridge its citizens’ civil liberties.  Social contract theorists like John Locke and Eric Smaw recognize that

… “since… the lawmaking power… is usually too numerous and too slow for the dispatch requisite to execution; and because it is impossible to foresee, and so by laws to provide for all accidents and necessities”   that may arise in times of emergency, the prerogative to act for the public good is placed in the hands of the executive. In this way, the executive is able to act for the public good “without the prescription of law,”   and, in some cases… against it. 

In these circumstances, the sovereign, or President’s prerogative is executed through “regulatory,” “interpretive,” or “gap-filling” power.  What is necessary to determine the right approach to such cases are principles of law, such as justice, fairness, equality, liberty, privacy, and the like.  This is because the legislature of no country can possibly write a law articulating every single case that might present itself before the judiciary.  It is for this reason that Dworkin articulates 

Law as integrity denies that statements of law are either the backward-looking factual reports of conventionalism or the forward-looking instrumental programs of legal pragmatism. It insists that legal claims are interpretive judgments and therefore combine backward- and forward-looking elements; They interpret contemporary legal practice seen as an unfolding political narrative. So law as integrity rejects as unhelpful the ancient question whether judges find or invent law; We understand legal reasoning, it suggests, only by seeing the sense in which they do both and neither… According to law as integrity, propositions of law are true if they figure in or follow from the principles of justice, fairness, and procedural due process that provide the best constructive interpretation of the community’s legal practice. 

However, “staunch pragmatist leaders” are at a high risk of abusing their power, and such regimes swiftly devolve into treating their citizens as means to an end, where they “are willing to sacrifice… any and all democratic processes.” 
As was previously discussed, insofar as human beings are rational and equal, they would not be willing to illegitimately surrender their autonomy, liberty, or bodily integrity to another.  After all, in a democracy, the people are equal, and must have the right to dissent, share contrarian perspectives, and build more resilient institutions, none of which would be permissible under the unified sovereign doctrine.  “Madmen” recognize that the aforementioned actions cannot be taken all at once without causing mass public outrage and resistance, which is why they orchestrate the perversion of the institutions of the democratic state through ploys like “emergencies” to slowly but surely implement their dictatorial agenda and justify infringing upon citizens’ rights.  This can be seen in Nazi Germany, where Hitler used the Reichstag Fire in 1933 as a pretext to issue the Reichstag Fire Decree, which suspended basic civil liberties, and allowed for the arrest and imprisonment of political opponents without due process.  It was a calculated “madman” move to consolidate executive power and subtly dismantle the democratic institutions of the Weimar Republic.  
We know that when the sovereign flagrantly disregards legal principles, as in this case, and interprets the law as an obstacle in its realization of political goals, the struggle between politics and law will inevitably result in the former prevailing over the latter.  The notion of institutional forbearance best elucidates this, through its condemnation of the problems of “actions that, while respecting the letter of the law, obviously violate its spirit,”  because as Locke rightly articulates it, “where-ever law ends, tyranny begins.”  This consequence is especially exacerbated when the sovereign simultaneously legislates, executes, and administers the law.  Without checks and balances to counter exercises of illegitimate authority, the “equilibrium between trustful constitutional cooperation and constitutional mechanisms of distrust” is disturbed.  Ultimately, the result is a despotic authoritarian institution that “peacefully, slowly, [and] legally” chips away at the separation of powers in an unprecedented way,  thereby subverting the Rule of Law integral to democracy into a Rule of Man by decree, as

[A democracy] may be a nation of laws, but the proper functioning of the law depends upon the competence and integrity of those charged with executing it. A president determined to thwart the law in order to protect himself and those in his circle has many means to do so. 

A constitutional regime, then, is grounded on a shared commitment to order,  of which one core tenet is the peaceful transfer of power, which refers to the transition from one Administration to the next.  This represents the stability of a governmental line of succession insofar as it is a secondary rule that outlines the procedural policies regulating political administration.  As such, respecting rules is equivalent to respecting institutions, which far outweighs the outcomes of partisan politics.  As Ice Cube poignantly affirmed, “You win some, you lose some. But you live, you live to fight another day.” 
However, that is not the case in authoritarian regimes. During the tumultuous period following World War I in Germany, the army had played a crucial role in stabilizing the country, offering support to whichever political party was in power, whether it be socialist, centrist, or conservative.  However, when the Nazi party gained power, the army faced a unique dilemma as its leaders had serious concerns about Hitler’s plans for war.  In the early days of the Nazi Party, the army had cooperated with the Storm Troopers, providing them with weapons and training to combat the perceived Communist threat.  The Storm Troopers, also known as the Sturmabteilung, was a paramilitary organization established in Germany in the early 1920s by Ernst Röhm as a security unit to protect Nazi Party meetings and rallies from disruptions by political opponents.  It played a key role in the rise of the Nazi Party, as they helped to intimidate and physically attack opponents of the Nazis, including communists, socialists, and Jews.  However, as Hitler rose to power, the Storm Troopers, which had grown to include nearly three million men, including members of the Stahlhelm, became a formidable rival to the army.  Thus, in an attempt to consolidate militant power prior to the Enabling Act of 1933, Röhm worked closely with Hitler to merge the Storm Troopers with Germany’s army. 
Back in 2017, historian Timothy Snyder famously promulgated a bleak prophecy of tyrannical paramilitaries and “dangerous words” based on these events: 

When the men with guns who have always claimed to be against the system start wearing uniforms and marching with torches and pictures of a leader, the end is nigh. When the pro-leader paramilitary and the official police and military intermingle, the end has come…  Be alert to the use of the words extremism and terrorism. Be alive to the fatal notions of emergency and exception…  Modern tyranny is terror management. When the terrorist attack comes, remember that authoritarians exploit such events in order to consolidate power. The sudden disaster that requires the end of checks and balances, the dissolution of opposition parties, the suspension of freedom of expression, the right to a fair trial, and so on, is the oldest trick in the Hitlerian book. Do not fall for it…  Be angry about the treacherous use of patriotic vocabulary. 

In a similar antithesis of democratic ideals that brought Snyder’s warning to life, the United States witnessed January 6, 2021, when a mob of Trump’s supporters attacked The Capitol in Washington, D.C. to prevent a joint session of Congress from counting the electoral college votes certifying the victory of President-elect Joe Biden.  Trump called on far right-wing mobs, including the Oath Keepers militia and the Proud Boys, to “fight like hell” to overturn the election;  he subsequently called them “patriots,”   singing the national anthem alongside them while they were serving their sentence in prison.  This was after the Committee hearings revealed extensive damage to property,  disorderly conduct,  violent entry,  weapons offenses,  threats to law enforcement officers,  and the use of tear gas at The Capitol.  According to the Partnership for Public Services’ Center for Presidential Transition, the transfer of power already had the potential to be “big, complicated, and dangerous;”  waging war on democracy when it was at its most vulnerable only aggravated this prospect, posing an existential threat to the United States. 
If this domestic rebellion would have gone to the extent of interfering with the functions of governmental institutions, which it was on the verge of, it would be incumbent upon the legislature to declare an “emergency,”  thereby suspending the citizenry’s right of habeas corpus.  However, given that the coup occurred at The Capitol, the executive would have had to exercise his oath-of-office-based prerogative to suspend habeas corpus in lieu of the legislature.  Given that Trump was the aforementioned executive at the time, and had himself incited the violence that occurred, he could very well have used the opportunity to declare Martial Law to indefinitely, arbitrarily, and illegitimately establish himself as the dictatorial sovereign “President.”  Recently, four leaders of the Proud Boys,  and eleven members of other far right-militias like the Oath Keepers were charged with seditious conspiracy,  for “forcibly opposing the authority of the federal government… and blocking the execution of laws governing the transfer of presidential power,”  such as the Electoral Count Act,  and the Twelfth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  
It is this problem of continuity that Hart highlights to demonstrate why Austin’s Theory fails to provide a valid foundation for a legitimate legal system:  when legal authority is vested in a person, and not an office, the power to make law will necessarily be interrupted at a certain point in time.  Hart observes that

The mere fact that there was a general habit of obedience to Rex I in his lifetime does not by itself even render probable that Rex II will be habitually obeyed… Acceptance of a rule by a society at one moment does not guarantee its continued existence… Even if we concede that a person, such as Rex, whose general orders are habitually obeyed, may be called a legislator and his orders laws, habits of obedience to each of a succession of such legislators are not enough to account for the right of a successor to succeed and for the consequent continuity and legislative power. 

Under Trump’s rule, then, as was the case under Hitler’s rule, the democratic transfer of power would inevitably result in this discontinuity of authority.  In these cases, democratic legal systems would lack persistence, and thus fail to be legitimate. 
Sovereign leaders are able to maintain these methods of governance that silently erode institutions and democratic principles when citizens retreat away from the public sphere,  “critics grow quieter, cynicism becomes endemic,”  corruption pervades society in an increasingly brazen manner,  and political opponents are intimidated or strong-armed into conceding.  As such, “the benefit of controlling a modern state is less the power to persecute the innocent, more the power to protect the guilty.”  With no system of checks and balances in place under the unified sovereign doctrine, such leaders are able to circumvent being held accountable for their actions. For example, Trump was twice shielded from impeachment,  as well as protected from prosecution for a wide range of criminal charges,  including his rape of E. Jean Carroll,  his obstruction of justice with the classified documents at Mar-a-Lago,  campaign finance crimes,  incitement of violence,  corruption by fraud,  seditious conspiracy,  violation of free and fair elections,  and more. The January 6 Committee and Justice Department’s recent hearings are testament to the fact that democracy persists only insofar as its guardrails are preserved.  
Importantly, populist and tyrannical executives alike have a vested interest in exploiting the power of language to maintain control over their citizenry.  Hobbes finds “the tongue of man [to be] a trumpet of war and sedition,” one which can be used as a political weapon to further discord in society.  Plato, too, had accurately asserted that “the sophistry of human nature is far more subtle than the deceit of any one man.”  Rather, it is an institutional mechanism of undermining intellectual culture.  After all, in post-truth eras like that which we live in today, objective facts have significantly less sway over public opinion than appeals to emotion do.  Bending the truth incrementally allows politicians and like leaders to set the frightening precedent of a lack of “truth and keeping of faith.”  As such, 

… there is no single moment that triggers widespread resistance or creates a focal point around which an opposition can coalesce… Piecemeal democratic erosion, therefore, typically provokes only fragmented resistance. 

For a better understanding of this, let us look to the “Big Lie” propaganda,  which was used by the Nazi regime to spread a falsehood “so colossal that no one would believe that someone could have the impudence to distort the truth so infamously.”  Hitler wrote about this technique in his manifesto Mein Kampf, describing his strategy of covering up the truth,  and how a lie, if big enough and repeated often enough, could eventually be accepted as truth by the masses.  He spread the false idea that Jews were responsible for Germany’s downfall, including its loss in World War I, and that they were an inferior race based on subordinate biological traits. 

I know perfectly well, just as well as these tremendously clever intellectuals, that in the scientific sense there is no such thing as race. But… I as a politician need a conception which enables the order which has hitherto existed… to be abolished and an entirely new and anti-historic order enforced and given an intellectual basis. [If there were no Jew] We should have then to invent him. It is essential to have a tangible enemy… Experience teaches us that after every catastrophe a scapegoat is found. 

It was this propaganda campaign that helped to stir up anti-Semitic sentiments, that had existed for centuries and can be traced back to various historical events, including the fight over usury, i.e., the charging of interest on loans.  In medieval Europe, Jews were often the only group allowed to lend money with interest since the Christian Church forbade the practice.  As a result, many Jews became wealthy and were seen as exploiting their Christian neighbors through moneylending,  a stereotype extensively examined by Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice.  In Nazi Germany, the belief that Jews controlled the economy and the banks was a central part of Hitler’s propaganda campaign.  He claimed that Jewish people were responsible for Germany’s economic woes, and used this as a justification for their persecution. 
Of course, these notions were obviously false, so it is important to consider why Germans were so susceptible to them. In Mein Kampf, Hitler also wrote that “excessive emphasis upon purely intellectual development and the neglect of physical education… leads to the premature onset of sexual fantasies.”  Consequently, he implemented drastic measures that included reducing education, persecuting intellectuals, destroying books, and burning art.  Hitler aimed to elevate German education and culture, but his hatred overshadowed his leadership, which severely impacted the country’s educational system.  Public school hours were shortened, and more emphasis was placed on physical training.  As a result, graduation requirements were reduced, and college enrollment decreased by 40 percent.  Many colleges eventually closed, and a third of Germany’s college teachers were forced to flee the country due to oppressive policies, including measures that were anti-Semitic. 
It was this diminishment of education that led to individuals being plagued by ignorance.  In the Handmaid’s Tale, however, Margaret Atwood poignantly notes that such a phenomenon was not involuntary: “ignoring isn’t the same as ignorance, you have to work at it.”  Germans began to suffer from a lack of critical thinking and chose not question the world around them.  Most importantly, it caused many of them to fail to see the perversion of the institutions of their state.  For this reason, they were left vulnerable to the machinations and whims of those who would exploit their protected and bubbled worldview.  They became the target of the aforementioned propaganda and misinformation, despite the fact that many of them were more accomplished in their careers, education, and social lives than Hitler himself.  They adored him and submitted to him as if he were their superior.  For instance, Hans Frank, a lawyer, considered Hitler a superman, while General Wilhelm Keitel, who was more knowledgeable in military matters than Hitler, gave him the title Gröfaz, which stands for Grösster Feldherr aller Zeiten, meaning “greatest warlord of all time.”  Even Himmler, a college graduate, praised Hitler as a leader so exceptional that he could only be found in a nation once in two thousand or five thousand years, and referred to him as “the greatest genius who ever lived.”  Thus, these individuals were influenced to follow Hitler’s orders and support the Nuremberg Laws and subsequent genocide of Jews, due to a combination of diminished education, propaganda, misinformation, and their own lack of critical thinking.  This “anticipatory obedience is a political tragedy.” 
In modern democracies, too, a leader like Trump is revered as a “genius,”  though he uses “doublespeak,” a method of obfuscating and manipulating the truth that George Orwell’s 1984 portrays to be a “precursor to totalitarian government.”  In It Can’t Happen Here, Sinclair Lewis writes,

He was an actor of genius. There was no more overwhelming actor on the stage, in the motion pictures, nor even in the pulpit. He would whirl arms, bang tables, glare from mad eyes, vomit Biblical wrath from a gaping mouth; but he would also coo like a nursing mother, beseech like an aching lover, and in between tricks would coldly and almost contemptuously jab his crowds with figures and facts – figures and facts that were inescapable even when, as often happened, they were entirely incorrect. 

Here, politicians use statements to gain the unwavering support of the public in different ways, shapes, and forms, but predominantly by “stat[ing] a claim in one [instance] and then den[ying] it entirely in another.”  In obscuring the real meaning underlying what one is saying by openly embracing contradictions, one prima facie puts oneself in a position to shift advocacy when required.  As such, individuals set up the conditions such that they may circumvent accountability. 
Trump and his supporters sought, in the months preceding the 2020 presidential election,  “to assert power over truth itself”  with their own “Big Lie” propaganda.  They blatantly abandoned reason and promulgated numerous unsubstantiated claims about the election being “stolen” through fraudulent votes,  despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary,  even going to the extent of asking “what is truth?”  It was these conspiracy theories that formed the basis of his speech at the D.C. rally, following which the mob stormed The Capitol.  To conceal such consequences, then, investigative journalism and other truth-seeking accountability institutions have been framed as partisan in attempts to strip them of their legitimacy.  However, though the leaders of retrogressing democracies “resent an independent press… they cannot extinguish it.”  As Snyder poignantly posited,

Believe in truth, [for] to abandon facts is to abandon freedom. If nothing is true, then no one can criticize power, because there is no basis upon which to do so. If nothing is true, then all is spectacle. The biggest wallet pays for the most blinding lights… you submit to tyranny when you renounce the difference between what you want to hear and what is actually the case. This renunciation of reality can feel natural and pleasant, but the result is your demise as an individual – and thus the collapse of any political system that depends upon individualism… demeaning the world as it is begins the creation of a fictional counterworld… post-truth is pre-fascism. 

The recent bans on Critical Race Theory in public schools and colleges in Florida and other states reflect a similar worrying trend of diminishing education.  The passage of HB 7, the “Stop W.O.K.E. Act,” under Governer Ron DeSantis’ Administration, for instance, prohibits public colleges and universities from allowing certain types of speech, including those deemed to be “offensive” or “controversial,”  which is already stifling the free exchange of ideas and limiting intellectual growth.  Such legislation suppresses important discussions about racism and historical injustices, with parents granted the ability to file suit against academics who teach the same to their children.  This is eerily reminiscent of Nazi Germany,  and the subsequent Red Scare.  In George Santayana’s famous words, “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it,”  as we seem to already be, in what Eric Smaw describes as the “Black Scare.”  The United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida’s Tallahassee Division even described such legislation as “positively dystopian.” 
Without knowledge of and the ability to critique institutions for their role in perpetuating racism, then, our minds cannot be free,  and we will inevitably witness the resurgence of propaganda about African American inferiority.  This is rooted in a twofold approach: firstly, Thomas Carlyle’s Principle of Work promoted a racialized “Natural” Hierarchy of Man, emphasizing the inherent duty of African Americans to work for European Americans.  This ignorant ideology has long been utilized to justify Slavery,  Jim Crow Segregation,  lynching,  the War on Drugs,  and still persists today with claims about minorities committing voter fraud: 

Ever since the founding fathers of our nation dreamed this dream, America has manifested a schizophrenic personality. She has been torn between [two] selves – a self in which she has proudly professed democracy and a self in which she has sadly practiced the antithesis of democracy. Slavery and segregation have been strange paradoxes in a nation founded on the principle that all men are created equal. 

Secondly, now-discredited biological claims about Phrenology and Eugenics were used to justify African American intellectual inferiority,  and subsequent forced sterilizations of Black women like Fannie Lou Hamer, as articulated by Eric Smaw in Uterus Collectors.  Therefore, it is imperative to engage in education and critical thinking such that we can wake up to propaganda and combat the ills of humanity. 
However, Aristotle acknowledged, in his Nicomachean Ethics, that the nature of evil extends beyond sheer ignorance.  He posited the notion of “akrasia,” i.e., the weakness of will.  In this view, individuals sometimes knowingly choose to do wrong despite knowing what is right.  John Steiner suggested that this weakness of will is a product of “sleeper[s],” which refers to a latent authoritarian personality type that has the potential for violence, but requires specific circumstances to be unleashed.  Ervin Staub builds on Steiner’s idea and suggests that the capacity for violence is a common trait among most people, and that all human beings have this primary capacity: “evil that arises out of ordinary thinking and is committed by ordinary people is the norm, not the exception.” 
This deliberate kind of sleepiness is much more insidious than falling prey to ignorance, because we rarely think of ourselves as the monsters that the media speaks of,  almost never stopping to ponder about how it is we who the ills of humanity plague.  Sleepiness, then, is a conscious choice to cover up the ills of humanity not solely around us, but also those that exist within us.  After all, “it is very hard for evil to take hold of the unconsenting soul.”  Such behavior entails systematically breaking down your conscience;  a choice to suppress the little voice in your heart over and over and over again, until one day, you’ll wake up with a moral sensibility so eroded that you won’t be able to privilege right over wrong.  It is this weakness of will that turns us numb to lying, cheating, stealing, and ultimately murder;  that allows us to turn a blind eye to injustice and suffering;  that can normalize violence and oppression,  and subsequently leads to the “banality of evil,”  where

Evil becomes commonplace; it becomes the everyday. Ordinary people – going about their everyday lives – become complicit actors in systems that perpetuate evil…  by calling a crime against humanity banal, [Hanna Arendt] was trying to point to the way in which the crime had become for the criminals accepted, routinised, and implemented without moral revulsion and political indignation and resistance. 

Staub argues that institutions can create a climate in which ordinary evil is more likely to flourish, with dictatorial societies being more prone to violence than others due to a history of violence and a lack of democratic principles.  When such institutions of the state are perverted by way of corruption, injustice, or oppression, as was the case of Nazi Germany, the people develop needs and modes of adaptation that are conducive to violence.  In those moments, an opportunity arises for ordinary individuals to truly become their worst selves, as they slip into the deliberate sleepiness that allows them to participate in the perpetration of evil.  This is precisely what happened in Lithuania during the Holocaust.  The perverted institutions of the Nazi regime, upon invasion, allowed for the systematic murder of Jews to become a normalized part of daily life, and many Lithuanians were voluntarily complicit in these crimes.  The “sleeper” “monsters” within had been activated. 
What is clear, then, is that beyond preserving institutional integrity, we must engage in critical thinking and moral development.  In Judith Butler’s words, “Arendt’s conviction that only philosophy could have saved those millions of lives [is remarkable],”  and aligns perfectly with the Nicomachean Ethics.  Thousands of years ago, Aristotle outlined the notions of education and habituation being necessary for creating good moral character and being virtuous citizens.  Education occurs when one learns about how they should act and what values are good.  It involves understanding how to introspect and reflect on one’s actions such that they can be altered in the future.  Habituation, by contrast, focuses on the development of moral habits such that in times of stress, like when the institutions of the state are perverted, one falls back on virtuous actions,  avoiding the behavior of zombies, serial killers, madmen, and sleepy. 
Of course, being virtuous entails a civic component as well: we cannot turn our backs on the institutions of democracy.  With regard to the perversion of government, Danielle Allen writes, “I muck the stalls. I find a diamond. I clean it off and keep it. I do not abandon it because of where I found it. Instead, I own it.”  As such, the principles of justice, liberty, and equality must not be protected with munitions, but with “an unwearying insistence upon the honesty, integrity, and professionalism of American institutions and those who lead them.”  After all, democracy, and by extension, society, rather than something to prima facie be established, is instead a result and “nexus of institutions” that must be evaluated on a continuous basis. 
One might argue, however, that the lack of moral development in criminals like sleepy is not caused solely by individual choices, but rather, is in large part caused by institutional failures that include childhood trauma, neglect, and abuse.  Then, focusing so heavily on the obligations of individuals shifts the responsibility away from the duties that institutions have to promoting “eudaimonia.”  In responding to this, I will defer to Martha Nussbaum’s conception of society, and how it is exactly for this reason that she emphasizes the importance of rehabilitation and reintegration into society.  She argues that punitive approaches to criminal justice, such as imprisonment and the death penalty, often fail to address the underlying social and psychological factors that contribute to criminal behavior.  She advocates for an alternative mechanism of restorative justice than Locke’s, one that focuses on repairing harm, addressing the needs of victims and offenders, and promoting social reconciliation. 
As such, her Capabilities Approach evaluates institutions based on how well they provide resources to enhance humans’ capabilities, such that we can then move forward to effectively holding individuals responsible for their actions.  She draws an important distinction between three types of resources to enhance one’s capabilities: basic resources, expansive resources, and moral resources.  Basic resources entail housing, food, and shelter.  Expansive resources entail education and healthcare.  Moral resources entail those opportunities that allow individuals to exercise their autonomy as moral agents, in accordance with the Aristotelian view.  Thus, Nussbaum argues that institutions are obligated to enhance all three resources for the purpose of facilitating individuals’ ability to actualize themselves.  So, while criminal activity cannot always be attributed to individuals, it is still important to engage in moral development, as these are the times of stress to which Aristotle was referring.  
Another interlocuter might suggest that serial killers do not have the potential to be virtuous, and consequently, cannot be educated or habituated out of their patterns of behavior.  To this, I would respond that the idea of innate or fixed character traits has been largely discredited, which elucidates the malleability and adaptability of human behavior.  While it may be difficult to rehabilitate serial killers, it is not impossible, as evidenced by successful rehabilitation programs in prisons and mental health facilities.  This is not to suggest that all serial killers will be reformed; rather, it is to indicate that regardless of measures we take to mitigate against the causes and effects of evil, it will persist. What we can do is make every intentional effort to exercise autonomy and act with our full rational capacities to be better people tomorrow than we are today. Thus, by providing serial killers with the necessary tools and support to reform their behaviors, we can help them cultivate virtues that align with the values of a just and compassionate society, even if it takes them a lifetime to do so. 
Lastly, one might object that individuals who are educated and habituated in the virtues might still be susceptible to moral fallibility.  So, if they are not always going to make the right decisions, surely it would be unjustified to suggest that they are evil, and that they are the reason why a democracy devolves into a dictatorship.  To this, I would actually agree. The point is not that virtuous individuals will never make mistakes, but that they recognize them as lapses of judgment, introspect on their behavior, and take active steps to change.  We know that moral development happens over time, and it is not something that can be achieved overnight, nor is it a fixed state that once attained, can be taken for granted.  Rather, it is a dynamic and ever-evolving process, one that requires continuous attention and dedication.  As such, the goal of developing a virtuous democratic society is so that even in the face of moral failure, individuals remain committed to their pursuit of holding themselves and others both internally and externally accountable. 
So, to citizens around the world, vote, for our democracies are at stake. Defend institutions.  Protest the abuse of power. Embrace the peaceful transfer of power. Hold yourself and your leaders accountable for their words and actions. Believe in truth. Respect checks and balances. Connect with those who hold beliefs different than yours. Always uphold your duties:

Get into the habit of telephoning [leaders] at their local offices… Press your [leaders] to ensure that prosecutors and judges are chosen for their independence – and that their independence is protected. Support laws to require the Treasury to release presidential tax returns… Express your support and sympathy for journalists attacked by social-media trolls, especially [minorities and] women in journalism, so often the preferred targets. Honor civil servants who are fired or forced to resign because they defied improper orders. Keep close watch for signs of the rise of a culture of official impunity, in which friends and supporters of power-holders are allowed to flout rules that bind everyone else… [because] what happens next is up to you and me. Don’t be afraid. This moment of danger can also be your finest hour as a citizen… 


Works Cited

Adams, John. “From John Adams to John Taylor.” Founder Online, National Archives and Records Administration, 17 Dec. 1814, https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Adams/99-02-02-6371. 
Alemany, Jacqueline, et al. “Talk of Martial Law, Insurrection Act Draws Notice of Jan. 6 Committee.” Politics, The Washington Post, 27 Apr. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/04/27/talk-martial-law-insurrection-act-draws-notice-jan-6-committee/. 
Allen, Danielle. “The Flawed Genius of the Constitution.” The Atlantic, Atlantic Media Company, 5 Oct. 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/10/danielle-allen-constitution/615481/. 
Alschuler, Albert W. “Seditious Conspiracy vs. Insurrection: Assessing the Evidence against Trump.” House Select Committee on January 6, Just Security, 19 Aug. 2022, https://www.justsecurity.org/82713/seditious-conspiracy-vs-insurrection-assessing-the-evidence-against-trump/. 
Anonymous. “18 USC § 2384: Seditious Conspiracy.” U.S. Law Code, House of Representatives, (n.d.), https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid%3AUSC-1999-title18-section2384&num=0&edition=1999. 
Anonymous. “2 May 1933: Dissolution of German Trade Unions.” Resources, n.d., www.hmd.org.uk/resource/2-may-1933-dissolution-of-german-trade-unions/. 
Anonymous. “Big Lie.” Glossary Index, European Center for Populism Studies, 25 Dec. 2020, www.populismstudies.org/Vocabulary/big-lie/. 
Anonymous. “Checks and Balances.” History.com, A&E Television Networks, 17 Nov. 2017, https://www.history.com/topics/us-government/checks-and-balances. 
Anonymous. “Electoral Count Act of 1887.” Forty-Ninth Congress Session II, GovTrack.us, 3 Feb. 1887, https://govtrackus.s3.amazonaws.com/legislink/pdf/stat/24/STATUTE-24-Pg373.pdf. 
Anonymous. “Florida Man Found Guilty of Felony and Misdemeanor Charges Related to Capitol Breach.” U.S. Attorney’s Office | District of Columbia, The United States Department of Justice, 9 Dec. 2022, https://www.justice.gov/usao-dc/pr/florida-man-found-guilty-felony-and-misdemeanor-charges-related-capitol-breach-0. 
Anonymous. “Indiana Man Pleads Guilty to Carrying a Gun and Assaulting Law Enforcement Officers in Jan. 6 Capitol Breach.” U.S. Attorney’s Office | District of Columbia, The United States Department of Justice, 17 June 2022, https://www.justice.gov/usao-dc/pr/indiana-man-pleads-guilty-carrying-gun-and-assaulting-law-enforcement-officers-jan-6. 
Anonymous. “Kristallnacht.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, n.d., United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/kristallnacht. 
Anonymous. “North Carolina NAACP V. McCrory.” Court Case Tracker, Brennan Center for Justice, 15 May 2017, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/court-cases/north-carolina-naacp-v-mccrory. 
Anonymous. “Reichstag Fire Decree.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, 28 Feb. 1933, https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/timeline-event/holocaust/1933-1938/reichstag-fire-decree. 
Anonymous. “Rule of Law.” Division for Public Education, American Bar Association, (n.d.), https://www.americanbar.org/groups/public_education/resources/rule-of-law/. 
Anonymous. “The Enabling Act.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, n.d., https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/the-enabling-act. 
Anonymous. “The January 6 Attack on the U.S. Capitol.” Domestic Terrorism and White Nationalism, American Oversight, 2 May 2022, https://www.americanoversight.org/investigation/the-january-6-attack-on-the-u-s-capitol. 
Anonymous. “The Nuremberg Race Laws.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, n.d., https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/the-nuremberg-race-laws. 
Anonymous. “The Nuremberg Race Laws.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, n.d., https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/the-nuremberg-race-laws. 
Anonymous. “Timeline of the German Military and the Nazi Regime.” Holocaust Encyclopaedia, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, n.d., https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/timeline-of-the-german-military-and-the-nazi-regime. 
Anonymous. “Transition of Power: From One Presidential Administration to the Next.” Basics, Center Forward, (n.d.), https://center-forward.org/basics/transition-power-one-presidential-administration-next/. 
Anonymous. “Trust in Government.” Public Governance, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), 2021, https://www.oecd.org/governance/trust-in-government/. 
Arendt, Hanna. “Quotable Quotes.” Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil, 1963, https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/banality-of-evil. 
Arendt, Hannah. “On Violence Quotes.” Quotes, Goodreads, (n.d.), https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/437062-on-violence. 
Arieti, James A. “Magical Thinking in Medieval Anti-Semitism: Usury and the Blood Libel.” Mediterranean Studies, vol. 24, no. 2, 2016, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.5325/mediterraneanstu.24.2.0193. 
Aristotle. “Book I, Part i: The State as an Association, 1252(a)1.” The Politics, edited by Trevor J. Saunders, translated by T. A. Sinclair, Revised ed., Penguin Classics Publishing, London, GB, 1981.
Aristotle. “Book I, Part ii: The State Exists by Nature, 1253(a)1.” The Politics, edited by Trevor J. Saunders, translated by T. A. Sinclair, Revised ed., Penguin Classics Publishing, London, GB, 1981.
Aristotle. “Book VII, Part ii: The Active Life and the Philosophic Life, 1324(a)5.” The Politics, edited by Trevor J. Saunders, translated by T. A. Sinclair, Revised ed., Penguin Classics Publishing, London, GB, 1981.
Aristotle. “Book X, Chapter 9, From Ethics to Politics - Moral Education.” Nicomachean Ethics, 3rd ed., Hackett Publishing Company, Incorporated, Indianapolis, 2019.
Ascher, Abraham. “Was Hitler a Riddle? Western Democracies and National Socialism.” The American Historical Review, vol. 118, no. 4, 25 Sept. 2013, https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/118.4.1243. 
Asma, Stephen T. “Monsters and the Moral Imagination.” The Chronicle Review, 22 July 2020, www.chronicle.com/article/monsters-and-the-moral-imagination/. 
Assy, Bethania. “Eichmann, the Banality of Evil, and Thinking in Arendt’s Thought.” Contemporary Philosophy, New School for Social Research, 1996, https://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Cont/ContAssy.htm. 
Atwood, Margaret. “10.” The Handmaid’s Tale, 1st ed., Anchor Books, a Division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 1998.
Austin, J. L. “The Province of Jurisprudence Determined.” Koeblergerhard, 1832, http://www.koeblergerhard.de/Fontes/AustinJohnTheprovinceofjurisprudencedetermined1832.pdf. 
Bailey, Anna, et al. “The System Made Me Do It: Strategies of Survival.” Global Encyclopaedia of Informality, Volume 2: Understanding Social and Cultural Complexity, edited by Alena Ledeneva, UCL Press, 2018, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt20krxgs.9. 
Balz, Dan. “A Year After Jan. 6, Are the Guardrails That Protect Democracy Real or Illusory?” Analysis, The Washington Post, 6 Jan. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/democracy-january-6/2022/01/06/2a1fc41e-6db4-11ec-a5d2-7712163262f0_story.html. 
Barney, Rachel. “Becoming Bad: Aristotle on Vice and Moral Habituation.” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, Edited by Victor Gaston, vol. 57, 20 Jan. 2020, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198850847.003.0009. 
Baum, Dan, et al. “Legalize It All.” How To Win the War on Drugs, Harper’s Magazine, 31 Mar. 2016, https://harpers.org/archive/2016/04/legalize-it-all/. 
Biden, Joseph. “Remarks by President Biden on Standing up for Democracy.” The White House, The United States Government, 2 Nov. 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/11/03/remarks-by-president-biden-on-standing-up-for-democracy/. 
Blanton, Richard E., et al. “Moral Collapse and State Failure: A View from the Past.” Frontiers in Political Science, vol. 2, no. 2, 16 Oct. 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2020.568704. 
Block, Melissa. “The Clear and Present Danger of Trump’s Enduring ‘Big Lie.’” Morning Edition Podcast, 23 Dec. 2021, www.npr.org/2021/12/23/1065277246/trump-big-lie-jan-6-election. 
Botting, Fred. “Limits of Horror: Technology, Bodies, Gothic.” Manchester University Press, 4 Jan. 2011, https://doi.org/10.7228/manchester/9780719077548.001.0001. 
Bouie, Jamelle. “The U.S. Thinks ‘It Can’t Happen Here.’ It Already Has.” Opinion, The New York Times, 18 Oct. 2022, www.nytimes.com/2022/10/18/opinion/democracy-america-authoritarianism-midterms.html. 
Brison, Susan J. “‘The Price We Pay’? Pornography and Harm.” Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics, edited by Andrew I. Cohen and Christopher Heath Wellman, 2nd ed., Wiley Blackwell, Chichester, 2014, Contemporary Debates in Philosophy Series.
Busby, John C. “M’Naghten Rule.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 9 June 2022, https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/m%27naghten_rule. 
Butler, Judith. “Hannah Arendt’s Challenge to Adolf Eichmann.” The Big Ideas: Ethics, The Guardian News and Media, 29 Aug. 2011, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/29/hannah-arendt-adolf-eichmann-banality-of-evil. 
Carlyle, Thomas. Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question, J. Fraser, 1849.
Cerar, Miro. “The Relationship Between Law and Politics.” Annual Survey of International & Comparative Law, vol. 15, no. 1, 2009, https://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1126&context=annlsurvey. 
Chappell, Zsuzsanna, and Herzog, Lisa. “How to Kill a Democracy in 10 Easy Steps (Spoiler Alert: Exhaust Your Citizens).” Democracy, Justice Everywhere, 14 Mar. 2022, http://justice-everywhere.org/democracy/how-to-kill-a-democracy-in-10-easy-steps-spoiler-alert-exhaust-your-citizens/. 
Clairmont, Nicholas. “‘Those Who Do Not Learn History Are Doomed to Repeat It.’ Really?” Culture & Religion, Big Think, 31 July 2013, https://bigthink.com/culture-religion/those-who-do-not-learn-history-doomed-to-repeat-it-really/#:~:text=%27Those%20who%20do%20not%20learn,are%20condemned%20to%20repeat%20it.”. 
Clark, Doug Bock, et al. “Building the ‘Big Lie:’ Inside the Creation of Trump’s Stolen Election Myth.” Politics, ProPublica, 26 Apr. 2022, https://www.propublica.org/article/big-lie-trump-stolen-election-inside-creation. 
Cobian, Aniela. “How Did People Justify Slavery?” History, Sojourner Truth African Heritage Museum, 23 Aug. 2021, www.sojoartsmuseum.org/how-did-people-justify-slavery. 
Collinson, Stephen. “Scenes of Sickening Violence at the Capitol Open January 6 Committee’s Case Against Trump and His Insurrectionist Conspiracy.” Politics, Cable News Network CNN, 10 June 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/10/politics/january-6-hearing-donald-trump/index.html. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Preamble.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 6.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 8.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 12.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 1, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 7, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 9, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 1, Clause 8.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 2, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 2, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 4, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article III, Section 1, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America. “Article VI, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Constitution of the United States of America, “Article VII.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
Corballis, Michael C. “Chapter 1: What Is Recursion?” The Recursive Mind: The Origins of Human Language, Thought, and Civilization, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2014.
Crick, Francis, and Christof Koch. “Towards a Neurobiological Theory of Consciousness.” Seminars in the Neurosciences, vol. 2, 13 Jan. 1990, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470751466.ch45. 
Cube, Ice. “You Win Some, You Lose Some. But You Live, You Live to Fight Another Day.” Twitter, 7 Nov. 2014, https://twitter.com/icecube/status/530819499344535552?lang=en. 
Dawes, Nic. “Maneuvering a New Reality for U.S. Journalism.” Politics, Columbia Journalism Review, 22 Nov. 2016, https://www.cjr.org/the_feature/trump_journalism_press_freedom_global.php. 
Douglass, Frederick. “Quotes.” Public Opinion and Attitudes, Stanford Center for Poverty and Inequality, 20 Feb. 1895, https://inequality.stanford.edu/publications/quote/frederick-douglass#:~:text=Quote%3A,nor%20property%20will%20be%20safe. 
Draper, John W. “Usury in ‘The Merchant of Venice.’” Modern Philology, vol. 33, no. 1, 1935, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/434335. 
Drezner, Daniel W. “Metaphor of the Living Dead: Or, the Effect of the Zombie Apocalypse on Public Policy Discourse.” Social Research, vol. 81, no. 4, 2014, JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26549655. 
Dworkin, Gerald. “Paternalism.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 9 Sept. 2020, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paternalism/. 
Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter One, What is Law?” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986.
Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter Seven, Integrity in Law.” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986.
Eisen, Norman, and Reisner, Katherine. “Whatever Legal or Constitutional Test You Apply, Trump Incited the Violent Capitol Attack.” USA Today, Gannett Satellite Information Network, 3 Feb. 2021, https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2021/02/03/donald-trump-incited-capitol-attack-by-any-legal-test-column/4370622001/. 
Eisen, Norman, et al. “Fulton County, Georgia’s Trump Investigation.” Report, The Brookings Institute, 14 Nov. 2022, https://www.brookings.edu/research/second-edition-fulton-county-georgias-trump-investigation/. 
Ellsberg, Daniel. The Political Uses of Madness. Lowell Lecture, Internet Archive, 1959. https://ia800102.us.archive.org/20/items/ThePoliticalUsesOfMadness/ELS005-001.pdf. 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. “Ralph Waldo Emerson Quote.” Quotes, AZ Quotes, (n.d.), https://www.azquotes.com/quote/534902. 
Enoch, David. “II – What’s Wrong with Paternalism: Autonomy, Belief, and Action.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Volume 116, Issue 1, Oxford University Press, 26 May 2016, https://academic.oup.com/aristotelian/article/116/1/21/2563116. 
Epperly, Brad, et al. “Rule by Violence, Rule by Law: Lynching, Jim Crow, and the Continuing Evolution of Voter Suppression in the U.S.” Perspectives on Politics, vol. 18, no. 3, 25 Mar. 2019, https://doi.org/10.1017/s1537592718003584. 
Erle, Sibylle, and Helen Hendry. “Monsters: Interdisciplinary Explorations in Monstrosity.” Palgrave Communications, vol. 6, no. 1, 25 Mar. 2020, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0428-1. 
Faber, David. Munich, 1938: Appeasement and World War II. Simon & Schuster, 2010.
Fandos, Nicholas. “Trump Impeached for Inciting Insurrection.” Politics, The New York Times, 22 Apr. 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/13/us/politics/trump-impeached.html. 
Feiling, Keith. “Chapter XVIII, Abyssinia and the Rhineland: 1935-1936.” The Life of Neville Chamberlain, 1st ed., Macmillan & Co., London, GB, 1946.
Feuer, Alan, and Zach Montague. “Four Proud Boys Convicted of Sedition in Key Jan. 6 Case.” Proud Boys Sedition Trial, The New York Times, 4 May 2023, www.nytimes.com/2023/05/04/us/politics/jan-6-proud-boys-sedition.html. 
Freudenheim, Tom. “In Berlin, the Nazis Burned Freud and Fitzgerald. In Florida, They’re Banning Eric Carle and Margaret Atwood.” Culture, The Forward, 11 May 2023, https://forward.com/culture/546615/book-bans-nazis-berlin-florida/. 
Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb. 
Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb. 
Fund, John. “The Big Liar.” Magazine, National Review, 15 Feb. 2016, www.nationalreview.com/magazine/2016/02/15/big-liar/. 
Gallagher, Sandy. “Accountability.” Proctor Gallagher Institute, 13 Mar. 2017. https://www.proctorgallagherinstitute.com/17557/accountability. 
Gessen, Masha. “The Putin Paradigm: To What Extent Can Putin Provide Insight into Trump’s Understanding of Power?” Politics, The New York Review of Books, 13 Dec. 2016, https://www.nybooks.com/online/2016/12/13/putin-paradigm-how-trump-will-rule/. 
Ghitis, Frida. “The Political Genius of Donald Trump.” Ideas, The Atlantic Media Company, 1 Apr. 2020, www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/trump-genius/609142/. 
Ghosh, Arko, and Patrick Haggard. “The Spinal Reflex Cannot Be Perceptually Separated from Voluntary Movements.” The Journal of Physiology, vol. 592, no. 1, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2013.260588. 
Gopal, Srik. “Understanding Trust to Strengthen Democracy.” Blog, Democracy Fund, 21 Aug. 2017, https://democracyfund.org/idea/understanding-trust-to-strengthen-democracy/. 
Green, Leslie, et al. “Introduction.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series.
Greene, Abner S. “Checks and Balances in an Era of Presidential Lawmaking.” The University of Chicago Law Review, vol. 61, no. 1, 1994, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1600091. 
Gupta, Deepak. “The Right to Dissent Is the Most Important Right Granted by the Constitution.” Law, The Wire, 24 Feb. 2020, https://thewire.in/law/right-to-dissent-constitution-justice-deepak-gupta. 
Haldeman, H. R. “Who Ordered the Break-In?” The Ends of Power, Star Books International, New York, NY, 1978.
Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter II, Laws, Commands, and Orders.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series.
Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter IV, Sovereign and Subject.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series.
Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter V, Law as the Union of Primary and Secondary Rules.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series.
Hitler, Adolf. “Chapter X, The Causes of the Collapse.” Mein Kampf, Renal & Hitchcock, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, MA, 1939, https://seminariofascismo.files.wordpress.com/2014/11/hitler_mein-kampf.pdf. 
Hobbes, Thomas, and Lamprecht, Sterling P. “Chapter V, Of the Causes, and First Beginning of Civil Government.” De Cive: On the Citizen, edited by Richard Tuck, translated by Michael Silverthorne, Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, NY, 1949, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. http://www.public-library.uk/ebooks/27/57.pdf. 
Hobbes, Thomas, and Lamprecht, Sterling P. “Chapter VI, On the Right of the Assembly or Man, Who Holds Sovereign Authority in the Commonwealth.” De Cive: On the Citizen, edited by Richard Tuck, translated by Michael Silverthorne, Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, NY, 1949, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. http://www.public-library.uk/ebooks/27/57.pdf. 
Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XIII: Of the Natural Condition of Mankind, The Incommodities of Such a War.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968.
Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XX: Of Dominion Paternall and Despoticall.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968.
Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XXVI: Of Civill Lawes, Civill Law What.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968.
Hohfeld, Wesley Newcomb. Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning, 1st ed., Yale University Press, New Haven, NH, 1964.
Hsu, Spencer S. “Justice Dept. Calls Jan. 6 ‘Capitol Attack’ Probe One of Largest in U.S. History, Expects At Least 400 To Be Charge.” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 13 Mar. 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/legal-issues/capitol-attack-investigation-largest/2021/03/12/5c07b46c-833d-11eb-9ca6-54e187ee4939_story.html. 
Huq, Aziz Z., and Ginsburg, Tom. “How to Lose a Constitutional Democracy.” U.C.L.A. Law Review, vol. 65, no. 78, 2017, https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=13666&context=journal_articles. 
Jacoby, Susan. “Eleven, Public Life: Defining Dumbness Downward.” The Age of American Unreason in a Culture of Lies, 2nd ed., Vintage Books, A Division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2018.
Jacoby, Susan. “One, The Way We Live Now: Just Us Folks.” The Age of American Unreason in a Culture of Lies, 2nd ed., Vintage Books, A Division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2018.
Jansen, Bart, and Johnson, Kevin. “DOJ Mapped Out Strong Obstruction Evidence Against Trump, Aides in Filing, Experts Say.” USA Today Politics, Gannett Satellite Information Network, 31 Aug. 2022, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2022/08/31/justice-department-trump-obstruction-mar-a-lago/7949164001/?gnt-cfr=1. 
Jaynes, Julian. “Chapter 4: The Bicameral Mind.” The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, 1st ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1982.
Johnson, Herschel V. “The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Johnson) to the Secretary of State.” Foreign Relations of the United States | Diplomatic Papers | General, Volume I, 24 Aug. 1938, https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1938v01/d537. 
Keane, Erin. “From Truthiness to Post-Truth, Just in Time for Donald Trump: Oxford Dictionaries’ Word of the Year Should Scare the Hell Out of You.” Salon, 19 Nov. 2016. https://www.salon.com/2016/11/19/from-truthiness-to-post-truth-just-in-time-for-donald-trump-oxford-dictionaries-word-of-the-year-should-scare-the-hell-out-of-you/. 
Kellerman, Ben. “The Photo That Helped Define the Jan. 6 Attack on the U.S. Capitol: A Visual Backstory.” Behind the Lens: January 6, Reuters, 30 Dec. 2021, https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-capitol-security-backstory/. 
Kelly, Meg, and Isaac Arnsdorf. “Behind Trump’s Musical Tribute to Some of the Most Violent Jan. 6 Rioters.” Elections, 8 May 2023, www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/interactive/2023/trump-j6-prison-choir/. 
Kendall-Taylor, Andrea, and Frantz, Erica. “How Democracies Fall Apart.” Why Populism Is a Pathway to Autocracy, Foreign Affairs, 5 Dec. 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2016-12-05/how-democracies-fall-apart. 
King, Martin Luther. “‘The Negro and the American Dream,’ Excerpt from Address at the Annual Freedom Mass Meeting of the North Carolina State Conference of Branches of the NAACP.” The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute, Stanford University, 25 Sept. 1960, https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/negro-and-american-dream-excerpt-address-annual-freedom-mass-meeting-north. 
Kirchmeier, Jeffrey L. “Aggravating and Mitigating Factors: The Paradox of Today’s Arbitrary and Mandatory Capital Punishment Scheme.” William and Mary Bill of Rights Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, art. 3, Mar. 1998. https://scholarship.law.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1443&context=wmborj. 
Kitcher, Patricia. “Chapter 9: Kant on the Unity of Self-Consciousness and Moral Agency.” The Self, 20 Aug. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190087265.003.0012. 
Lamer, Antonio. “R. v. Parks.” Decisions and Resources (Criminal Law), 27 Aug. 1992, https://scc-csc.lexum.com/scc-csc/scc-csc/en/item/907/index.do. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. “Quotable Quotes.” A Wizard of Earthsea, 1968, https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/117582-it-is-very-hard-for-evil-to-take-hold-of. 
Lee Drutman, Lee, et al. “Democracy Maybe: Attitudes on Authoritarianism in America.” Voter Study Group, Democracy Fund, June 2020, https://www.voterstudygroup.org/publication/democracy-maybe#a-majority-of-americans-are-open-to-common-reasons-that-an-authoritarian-leader-would-use-to-ignore-checks-on-their-authority. 
Levitsky, Steven, and Ziblatt, Daniel. “5: The Guardrails of Democracy.” How Democracies Die, Broadway Books, New York, NY, 2019.
Lewis, Sinclair, et al. “Chapter IX.” It Can’t Happen Here, 3rd ed., Project Gutenberg Australia, Sydney, AU, 2022. http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks03/0301001h.html#ch9. 
Lewis, Sinclair, et al. “Chapter XXIV.” It Can’t Happen Here, 3rd ed., Project Gutenberg Australia, Sydney, AU, 2022. http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks03/0301001h.html#ch24. 
Lewis, Victoria. “Gov. Ron DeSantis Says ‘Stop W.O.K.E. Act’ Allows Parents to Sue Schools for Teaching Critical Race Theory.” Political News, WPTV News Channel 5 West Palm Beach, 15 Dec. 2021, www.wptv.com/news/political/desantis-stop-woke-act-announcement. 
Lloyd, Sharon A., and Sreedhar, Susanne. “Hobbes’s Moral and Political Philosophy.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 12 Sept. 2022, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hobbes-moral/. 
Locke, John. “Chapter II, Of the State of Nature.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980.
Locke, John. “Chapter XIV, Of Prerogative.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980.
Locke, John. “Chapter XVIII, Of Tyranny.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980.
Machiavelli, Niccolo, and Nathan Tarcov. “Book 3, Chapter 2.” Discourses on Livy, translated by Harvey C. Mansfield, Paperback ed., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1517, https://identityhunters.files.wordpress.com/2017/07/niccolo-machiavelli-discourses-of-livy.pdf. 
Maden, Jack. “Hannah Arendt on Standing Up to the Banality of Evil.” The Problem of Evil, Philosophy Break, May 2020, https://philosophybreak.com/articles/hannah-arendt-on-standing-up-to-the-banality-of-evil/. 
Madison, James. “Federalist No. 47: The Particular Structure of the New Government and the Distribution of Power Among Its Different Parts.” The Avalon Project | Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, 1 Feb. 1788, https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed47.asp. 
Madison, James. “Federalist No. 51: The Structure of the Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks and Balances Between the Different Departments.” The Avalon Project | Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, 8 Feb. 1788, https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed51.asp. 
Matthews, Tom. “Jack the Ripper Newspaper Collection.” Serial Killers, Historic Newspapers, 3 Nov. 2021, www.historic-newspapers.co.uk/blog/jack-the-ripper-newspaper-collection/. 
Matusow, Allen J. “Nixon as Madman.” Reviews in American History, vol. 27, no. 4, 1999, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/30031113. 
Mayer, Jane. “Can Cyrus Vance, Jr., Nail Trump?” A Reporter at Large, The New Yorker, 12 Mar. 2021, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/03/22/can-cyrus-vance-jr-nail-trump. 
Mazzei, Patricia, et al. “Florida at Center of Debate as School Book Bans Surge Nationally.” Books, The New York Times, 22 Apr. 2023, www.nytimes.com/2023/04/22/books/book-ban-florida.html. 
McKay, Ivy. “Donald Trump and Doublespeak: An Unsettling Precursor to the Dystopian Society of George Orwell’s 1984.” The Pegasus Review: University of Central Florida Undergraduate Research Journal, vol. 10, no. 1, 15 Oct. 2018, https://stars.library.ucf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1091&context=urj. 
McManus, Roseanne W. “Revisiting the Madman Theory: Evaluating the Impact of Different Forms of Perceived Madness in Coercive Bargaining.” Security Studies, vol. 28, no. 5, 13 Sept. 2019, https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2019.1662482. 
Mohamed, Saira. “Of Monsters and Men: Perpetrator Trauma and Mass Atrocity.” Columbia Law Review, vol. 115, no. 5, 2015, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/43582425. 
Montesquieu, Baron de. “Chapter 6, Of the Constitution of England.” The Spirit of Laws, Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty with Regard to the Constitution, vol. 2, Cosimo, New York, NY, 1748.
Mukherjee, Saikat. “The Command of the Sovereign: Relevance of Austin’s Theory of Law in the Indian Legal System.” Austin’s Idea of Jurisprudence, Legal Service India E-Journal for Law, Lawyers and Legal Resources, (n.d.), https://www.legalserviceindia.com/legal/article-7800-the-command-of-the-sovereign-relevance-of-austin-s-theory-of-law-in-the-indian-legal-system.html. 
Nussbaum, Martha C. “Chapter Two, Adaptive Preferences and Women’s Options.” Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach, Revised ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, GB, 2001, The Seeley Lectures, Series Number 3.
Oladipo, Gloria. “‘Just the Tip of the Iceberg’: Kimberlé Crenshaw Warns Against Rightwing Battle Over Critical Race Theory.” News, The Guardian, 4 Mar. 2023, www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/mar/04/critical-race-theory-kimberle-crenshaw-segregation-us-democracy. 
Ostertag, Gary. “Cruelty and Kinds: Scalia and Dworkin on the Constitutionality of Capital Punishment.” Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, vol. 61, no. 4, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174x.2017.1371875. 
Owen, Taylor, and Ben Kiernan. “Bombs Over Cambodia.” Genocide Studies Program, Yale University, Oct. 2006, https://gsp.yale.edu/sites/default/files/walrus_cambodiabombing_oct06.pdf. 
Parker, Ashley. “Jan. 6 Hearing Shows Trump Knew He Lost - Even While Claiming Otherwise.” Analysis, The Washington Post, 14 Oct. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/10/14/trump-knew-he-lost-jan-6/. 
Pendharkar, Eesha. “Efforts To Ban Critical Race Theory Could Restrict Teaching for a Third of America’s Kids.” Equity & Diversity, Education Week, 8 Feb. 2022, www.edweek.org/leadership/efforts-to-ban-critical-race-theory-now-restrict-teaching-for-a-third-of-americas-kids/2022/01. 
Platin, Jacob. “An Examination of Josip Broz Tito and Yugoslavia as an Application of Hobbesian Statecraft and Philosophy.” University of Pennsylvania, GitHub, (n.d.), https://jrplatin.github.io/files/hobbes.pdf.  
Plato. “Gorgias.” Translated by Benjamin Jowett, Plato’s Gorgias, Ancient Texts, 380 B.C., http://www.ancienttexts.org/library/greek/plato/gorgias.html.  
Quilantan, Bianca. “The New Red Scare for Red States: Diversity Programs.” Education, Politico, 19 Mar. 2023, www.politico.com/news/2023/03/19/gop-culture-war-college-dei-florida-texas-00087697. 
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 4: The Zombie in the Brain.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009. 
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 8: “The Unbearable Likeness of Being”.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 12: Do Martians See Red?” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Rawls, John. “Chapter II: The Principles of Justice, Section 14.” A Theory of Justice. Revised ed., The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1999.
Rees, Laurence. The Nazis: A Warning from History, 1997, https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0207907/. 
Richer, Alanna Durkin. “Explainer: Rare Sedition Charge at Center of Jan. 6 Trial.” AP News, Associated Press, 28 Sept. 2022, https://apnews.com/article/what-does-sedition-charge-mean-3aa820dda5f501dd874c4dd6d60ca1ce. 
Roman, Meredith. “Making Race in the Twentieth- and Twenty-First-Century United States.” Journal of American Ethnic History, vol. 35, no. 3, 2016, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.5406/jamerethnhist.35.3.0099. 
Russell, Luke. “Dispositional Accounts of Evil Personhood.” Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition, vol. 149, no. 2, 2010, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/40606353. 
Scaltsas, Theodore. “Weakness of Will in Aristotle’s Ethics.” The Southern Journal of Philosophy, vol. 24, no. 3, Aug. 1986, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2041-6962.1986.tb01574.x. 
Scannell, Kara, and Valle, Lauren del. “Trump Organization Found Guilty on All Counts of Criminal Tax Fraud.” Politics, Cable News Network CNN, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/12/06/politics/trump-organization-fraud-trial-verdict/index.html. 
Schmid, Verena, and Marianne Schwarz. “End of Christmas Trial – Monster Acquitted.” On the Web, 11 Mar. 1991, http://ovtg-alt.ovtg.de/3_arbeit/englisch/monster/_hpgen_content22.htm. 
Sciutto, Jim. “1. The End of American Exceptionalism.” The Madman Theory: Trump Takes on the World, Harper Collins, New York, NY, 2020.
Sciutto, Jim. “2. Commander in Chief.” The Madman Theory: Trump Takes on the World, Harper Collins, New York, NY, 2020.
Sciutto, Jim. “6. “Fire and Fury”: North Korea, Part One.” The Madman Theory: Trump Takes on the World, Harper Collins, New York, NY, 2020.
Sciutto, Jim. “7. “Falling In Love”: North Korea, Part Two.” The Madman Theory: Trump Takes on the World, Harper Collins, New York, NY, 2020.
Shakespeare, William. “A Quote from the Tempest.” Quotable Quotes, 1611, www.goodreads.com/quotes/30130-hell-is-empty-and-all-the-devils-are-here. 
Sherry, Michael S. “6. The War Mentality in Triumph, 1966-1974.” In The Shadow of War: The United States Since the 1930s, Yale University Press, New Haven, NH, 1997.
Smaw, Eric D. “Introduction to The Great Debate.” Tiedtke Concert Hall, Rollins College, 5 Oct. 2022.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 325: Philosophy of Law.” Knowles Memorial Chapel, Room 1, Rollins College, 19 Sept. 2022.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 325: Philosophy of Law.” Knowles Memorial Chapel, Room 1, Rollins College, 28 Nov. 2022.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, & Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 30 Jan. 2023.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, & Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 8 Feb. 2023.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” 27 Mar. 2023. Ward Hall (Room 1), Rollins College.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” 12 Apr. 2023. Ward Hall (Room 1), Rollins College. 
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” 19 Apr. 2023. Ward Hall (Room 1), Rollins College.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen.” 1 May 2023. Ward Hall (Room 1), Rollins College.
Smaw, Eric D. “Swaying in the Balance: Civil Liberties, National Security, and Justice in Times of Emergency.” ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy, vol. 97, no. 1, 2011, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23680996. 
Smaw, Eric D. “The Black Scare.” Academe, American Association of University Professors, 3 Oct. 2021, https://academeblog.org/2021/10/03/the-black-scare/. 
Smaw, Eric D. “Uterus Collectors: The Case for Reproductive Justice for African American, Native American, and Hispanic American Female Victims of Eugenics Programs in the United States.” Bioethics, vol. 36, no. 3, 12 Dec. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12977. 
Snyder, Timothy. “1. Do Not Obey in Advance.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “2. Defend Institutions.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “3. Beware the One-Party State.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “5. Remember Professional Ethics.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “6. Be Aware of Paramilitaries.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “10. Believe in Truth.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “11. Investigate.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “17. Listen for Dangerous Words.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “18. Be Calm When the Unthinkable Arrives.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “19. Be a Patriot.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017.
Snyder, Timothy. “Quotable Quotes.” Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin, 12 Oct. 2010, https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/588735-it-is-easy-to-sanctify-policies-or-identities-by-the. 
Snyder, Timothy. “Quotable Quotes.” The Road to Unfreedom: Russia, Europe, America, 3 Apr. 2018, www.goodreads.com/quotes/9663333-in-the-end-though-freedom-depends-upon-citizens-who-are. 
Staub, Ervin. “2, The Origins of Genocide and Mass Killing: Core Concepts.” The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence, Revised ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, GB, 1992.
Stokes, Susan. “Explaining Democratic Erosion.” World Politics Series, Kellogg Institute for International Studies, 27 Sept. 2022, https://kellogg.nd.edu/explaining-democratic-erosion. 
Swan, Jonathan. “Trump Urges Staff to Portray Him as ‘Crazy Guy.’” Fixgov, The brookings Institute, 9 Mar. 2022, www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2017/10/04/trump-urges-staff-to-portray-him-as-crazy-guy/. 
Szasz, Thomas. “Thomas Szasz Quote.” Quotes, AZ Quotes, (n.d.), https://www.azquotes.com/quote/1394576. 
Takezawa, Yasuko I., et al. “Building the Myth of Black Inferiority.” Sociology & Race, Encylopaedia Brittanica, Inc., 17 Dec. 2004, www.britannica.com/topic/race-human/Building-the-myth-of-Black-inferiority. 
Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. 
Trump, Donald. “Trump’s Full Speech at D.C. Rally on Jan. 6.” The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones & Company, 7 Feb. 2021, https://www.wsj.com/video/trump-full-speech-at-dc-rally-on-jan-6/E4E7BBBF-23B1-4401-ADCE-7D4432D07030.html. 
Turner, Christopher. “Trouble in Paradise: Aristotle’s Ideal Polis & Political Exclusion.” Revista Portuguesa de Filosofia, vol. 76, no. 1, 2020, JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26915601. 
United States District Court, Northern District of Florida, Tallahassee Division. “Pernell v. Florida Board of Governors.” ACLU, U.S. Judicial Branch, 17 Nov. 2022, https://www.aclu.org/wp-content/uploads/legal-documents/pernell_pi_order_0.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Furman v. Georgia; Mr. Justice Marshall, Concurring.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 29 June 1972, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep408/usrep408238/usrep408238.pdf. 
United States Supreme Court. “Lockett v. Ohio.” Library of Congress, U.S. Judicial Branch, 3 July 1978, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep438/usrep438586/usrep438586.pdf. 
Victor, George. “Chapter 4, The Turn Toward Nihilism.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Victor, George. “Chapter 6, The Call.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Victor, George. “Chapter 7, The Man.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Victor, George. “Chapter 8, In Power.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Victor, George. “Chapter 10, Exhibiting Charisma.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Victor, George. “Chapter 13, Scapegoating.” Hitler: The Pathology of Evil, 1st ed., Brassey Publishing, Dulles, VA, 1997.
Villa, Dana. “Chapter 1. Arendt, Aristotle, and Action.” Arendt and Heidegger, Princeton University Press, 1996, https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400821846.17. 
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part II, Selected Case Studies of Female Serial Killers and Accomplices in the Twentieth Century – Chapter 7, Nazi Bitches and Manson Killer Girls.” Female Serial Killers How and Why Women Become Monsters. Berkley Books, 7 Aug. 2007.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part Two, The Method and Madness – Chapter 4, The Evolution of Monstrosity:  Visionary Missionary Hedonist Power-Assertive Anger-Retaliatory Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy Serial Spree Killers and Other Emerging Categories.” Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters. Berkley Books, 5 Oct. 2004.
Vronsky, Peter, et al. “Part Two, The Method and Madness – Chapter 7, The Serial Murderer’s First Kill: Triggers, Facilitators, Detective Magazines, Paraphilic Hard Porn and The Bible.” Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters. Berkley Books, 5 Oct. 2004.
Vujoševiċ, Marijana. “The Kantian Capacity for Moral Self-Control: Abstraction at Two Levels.” Archiv Für Geschichte Der Philosophie, vol. 102, no. 1, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1515/agph-2020-1004. 
Waldman, Ellen A., and Lola Akin Ojelabi. “Mediators and Substantive Justice: A View from Rawls’ Original Position.” Thomas Jefferson School of Law, Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution, vol. 30, no. 3, 19 Sept. 2016, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/161947317.pdf. 
Waldman, Michael. “Focus On the Big Lie, Not the Big Liar.” Analysis, Brennan Center for Justice, 14 June 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/focus-big-lie-not-big-liar. 
Walsh, Deirdre. “Capitol Police Chief: Jan. 6 Failures ‘Largely’ Fixed but Extremism Threat Persists.” WUSF Public Media, National Public Radio NPR, 6 Dec. 2022, https://wusfnews.wusf.usf.edu/2022-12-06/capitol-police-chief-jan-6-failures-largely-fixed-but-extremism-threat-persists. 
Warnock, Taylor Dybdahl. “Separation of Powers - An Overview.” Separation of Powers, National Conference of State Legislatures, 1 May 2021, https://www.ncsl.org/research/about-state-legislatures/separation-of-powers-an-overview.aspx. 
Weiner, Rachel. “GOP Operative Found Guilty of Funneling Russian Money to Donald Trump.” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 17 Nov. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/11/17/benton-trump-russian-vasilenko-guilty/. 
Weiner, Rachel. “Trump Told Crowd To ‘Fight Like Hell’ Before Riot. Can He Be Sued?” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/12/07/trump-jan6-riot-lawsuit/. 
Weiser, Benjamin, et al. “Donald Trump Sexually Abused and Defamed E. Jean Carroll, Jury Finds.” Trump-Carroll Case, The New York Times, 9 May 2023, www.nytimes.com/2023/05/09/nyregion/trump-carroll-trial-sexual-abuse-defamation.html. 
Whelan, Frederick G. “Language and Its Abuses in Hobbes’ Political Philosophy.” The American Political Science Review, vol. 75, no. 1, 1981, JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/1962159. 
Whitman, James Q. “Presumption of Innocence or Presumption of Mercy?: Weighing Two Western Modes of Justice.” Texas Law Review, vol. 94, no. 5, 2015, https://texaslawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Whitman.FinalPDF.pdf. 
Williams, Griffith Wynne. “Highway Hypnosis: A Hypothesis.” International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, vol. 11, no. 3, 1963, https://doi.org/10.1080/00207146308409239. 
World Science Festival. “The Curious Case of Kenneth Parks.” YouTube, YouTube, 18 Mar. 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AuWAkREjl6U. 