A Just War or Just a War?  An Ethical Inquiry into the United States of America’s 2003 Invasion of Iraq

Following the former U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell’s Address to the United Nations Security Council in 2003,  the United States of America under the Bush Administration invaded Iraq.  At issue is the disparity between what some find the war to be, i.e., one of necessity, and what those like former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright find it to be, i.e., a “war of choice.”  Of course, the implication is that if the war were to be illegal under blackletter law, it must necessarily have been an act of the executive’s prerogative power, in which case it must be justified otherwise.  The principal causes of this war were outlined in the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002, unofficially known as the Iraq Resolution: “to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction, to end Saddam Hussein’s support for terrorism, and to free the Iraqi people.”  This rationale has long been debated and criticized for its empirical (in)validity and jurisprudential (im)permissibility. In what follows, I offer substantial philosophical and pragmatic analyses of the reasoning underlying the United States of America’s invasion of Iraq. I do so to illustrate the extent to which the decision was ethically grounded.
In his seminal work, Politics Among Nations, founder of International Realism Hans Morgenthau distinguishes between individuals and states for the purpose of demonstrating that states, and by extension, politics in general, are not obligated to abide by ethical principles.  Instead, they must consider the “political consequences” of making any decision with regard to the context and set of circumstances at hand.  After all, a state is responsible for its citizens.  It follows that preserving its own survival is a necessary condition for the protection of those under its sovereign jurisdiction.  Under this view, it would be permissible for states to go to any lengths necessary towards this end, be it war or otherwise, which include taking measures that violate universal moral principles. 
In Summa Theologica, St. Thomas Aquinas recognized the merit to similar proposals at the time, and so contended that war should not be considered immoral in all circumstances.  However, he did take issue with the notion that states were not obligated to abide by moral judgments.  For this reason, he posited what is contemporarily referred to as Just War Theory, a doctrine of military ethics that sets out a twofold criterion under which war is morally justifiable, the first of which concerns us in this case, and is called ‘jus ad bellum.’  These principles outline the right to go to war, and emphasize such elements as just cause (i.e., a case of aggression),  competent authority (i.e., “only duly constituted public authorities may use force” ), right intention (i.e., the war must be waged for the purpose identified),  last resort (i.e., other alternatives must be exhausted before the resort to war),  and proportionality (i.e., the benefits expected from the war must equal or exceed the harm to which it is a response).  Aquinas argued that conflict which rises to the level of war is justified insofar as it is waged by “the authority of the sovereign to further the advancement of good, or the avoidance of evil.”  
As the neo-Westphalian era of state sovereignty emerged, 17th century political philosopher Hugo Grotius used Just War Theory to provide legal justifications for assessing and adjudicating the contending causes of war.  Here, he laid the groundwork for international humanitarian law between states bearing legitimate authority over the protection of their citizens.  Grotius posited “defense, recovery of property, and punishment” as justifiable causes in Book II of De Jure Belli ac Pacis, i.e., On the Law of War and Peace.  Consistent with his guidelines is the notion that unjustified acts on the part of aggressors (whether or not they are legitimate states) do not necessarily warrant war being waged against them.  Rather, the executive actors must also possess rightful intentions for taking action.  Grotius emphasised the transparency of the causes of war such that the public would be able the final arbiter of cases in their entirety.  In doing so, moral restraints would be placed on the actions of the executive or sovereign or whichever legitimate authority claimed the right to go to war.  
Importantly, in the aftermath of World War II, the International Law Commission of the United Nations codified these concepts in the Nuremberg Principles, which set out several global crimes, including

Planning, preparation, initiation, or waging of a war of aggression or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements, or assurances… participation in a common plan or conspiracy [to initiate such a war]. 

The explicit forbiddance of aggressive war is grounded in Article 2 (4) of the U.N. Charter,  a peremptory norm that the U.S. was “prima facie [found in] violation [of]” when it invaded Iraq.  In an interview with the BBC World Service broadcast, former U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan formally declared the war illegal.  This was especially significant given that the Security Council had already stood in solidarity with America in agreeing to Resolution 1441.  Resolution 1441 offered Saddam Hussein’s Iraq a “final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations” in cooperation with U.N. inspectors, but did not authorize the use of force.  Thus, as aforementioned, insofar as the U.S. invasion violated international law, it must be either have been ethically or philosophically justified.
As such, a critical examination of the causes behind the war is in order to evaluate its legitimacy. As peacebuilding scholar Gerard Powers articulated it,

Iraq is a hard case. It is held up as a poster child for three potentially interconnected moral challenges posed by contemporary international relations – rogue regimes, global terrorism, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.  

One of the most widely and frequently referenced reasons behind the invasion was the U.S. government’s insistence upon Iraq possessing weapons of mass destruction.  Several high-level officials under the Bush Administration testified time after time to having witnessed real evidence supporting these claims, including President George W. Bush,  Vice President Richard Cheney,  Secretary of State Colin Powell,  Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld,  FBI Director Robert Mueller,  White House press secretary Ari Fleischer,  and more. In spite of this, following Resolution 1441 in 2002, when Saddam Hussein accepted the seizure and inspection of all technologies and developments in their chemical, atomic, and biological weapons, the International Atomic Energy Agency “found no evidence or plausible indication of the revival of a nuclear weapons programme in Iraq,”  and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission “did not find evidence of the continuation or resumption of [such] programmes” or even any items with destructive capacities that had been proscribed.  After the invasion, the Iraq Survey Group too concluded that all major stockpiles of the aforementioned weapons were dismantled after economic sanctions were imposed in 1991.  Further, the infamous leaked Downing Street Memo, a transcript of the minutes of a secret meeting between the British government and MI6 intelligence officials, revealed classified references to U.S. policy, including that the Bush Administration had decided to not only “fix intelligence” supporting their weapons of mass destruction claims, but also “invade Iraq even if no weapons of mass destruction were found.”  Thus, it is clear that there was no legitimate evidence that would have justified the United States’ invasion basis this line of reasoning. 
However, even if there were evidence supporting Iraq’s possession of weapons of mass destruction, or that evidence was contested and subject to interpretation, their presence would not have served as a sufficient just cause for invasion. To understand this, there is an important distinction to be drawn between a pre-emptive war and a preventative war. A pre-emptive war is one in which the defender attacks their opponent first, upon identifying evidence that the opponent’s strike was imminent.  This is what President Bush’s National Security Strategy, i.e., the Bush doctrine, claimed to have been the case with Iraq: “nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger of attack.”  In so doing, the U.S. government invoked the collective self-defence clause of Article 51 of the U.N. Charter.  Still, as international politics scholar Chris Dolan posits, the “nexus between just cause and self-defence is somewhat restrictive.”  While the use of pre-emptive force when an anticipated attack is in preparation is justified under this view, the threat must be imminent, i.e., “the danger [to be defended against] must be immediate, and as it were, at the point of happening.”  As such, Article 51 does not account for long-term, broad, or vague harms that may arise from an opponent’s potential actions. For this reason, while Iraq’s possession of weapons of mass destruction would undoubtedly have constituted a violation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,  it would have posed neither a direct nor an imminent threat to the United States of America specifically. Contrary to popular belief at the time, Iraq neither held hostile intentions towards nor was actively taking measures to aggressively attack the U.S. 
Rather, what the National Security Strategy’s claim about pre-emption more closely resembled, was that of a preventative war. According to political theorist Michael Walzer and others, a preventative war is 

… the use of force to eliminate a perceived threat that is not yet imminent… [an] attack that responds to a distant danger, a matter of foresight and free choice… [and] has nothing to do with the immediate security of boundaries. 

Here, the problem is that this line of reasoning would inevitably result in widespread paranoia and suspicion among states in the international community, if not increase the frequency of war.  As political scientist Richard Betts rightly articulated it,

When security is defined in terms broader than protecting the near-term integrity of national sovereignty and borders, the distinction between offense and defense blurs hopelessly… security can be as insatiable an appetite as acquisitiveness – there may never be enough buffers. 

Even worse, any country simply accused of possessing illicit ammunition or the like would be subject to having their sovereignty violated by a unilateral initiation of warfare.  This would set a frightening precedent of a lack of “[trust], truth, and keeping of the faith,”  core tenets of the mutually-assured cooperation system that distinguish our world order today from its ancient state of chaos and anarchy.  It is in expectation of issues like this that in 1996, the International Court of Justice reminded states of their “obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion, negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control.”  As such, under the Just War tradition in this case, the U.S.’ broad-sweeping rationale to use Iraq as a mere means to the end of “eliminating any possible future threat” could not possibly have been ethically justifiable.  After all, military general and theorist Carl von Clausewitz poignantly described war as “nothing but the continuation of policy by other means.”  For him, political leaders and their goals are interwoven with the ultimate end of a conflict:

No one starts a war – or rather, no one in his senses ought to do so – without first being clear in his mind what he intends to achieve by that war and how he intends to conduct it. The former is the political purpose, the latter its operational objective. 

  Analysing the aforementioned line of inquiry requires one to distinguish between what is a legitimate state possessing weapons of mass destruction on the one hand, and what is a non-state terrorist or extremist group possessing said weapons on the other.  President Emeritus of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation David Krieger argues that in the case of the former, a country’s static geography would dictate its high affinity for deterrence “by threat of retaliation from using such weapons.”  Conversely, non-state organizations have access to quickly changing and often unidentifiable locations to conduct their operations, which make them (a) much more dangerous and volatile targets, and (b) far less likely to be deterred by threats, given that they are oftentimes suicidal.  In this case, conflating the nature of the two entities by maintaining that Iraq under Saddam Hussein’s rule held strong ties to terrorist organizations like Al Qaeda, allowed the U.S. to modify and further its own agenda for invasion.  
As became evident in time, the justifications for the war morphed into related but entirely different issues. Moral philosopher Jeff McMahan explained, 

The moral nature of a war can change… because conditions are continually changing, whether it’s permissible to continue to fight is always an open question… jus ad bellum [are] not [solely] a set of principles to check when initiating a war, but a set of principles that [have] to be reapplied continually.  

 Thus, while one cause in this continual evaluation might not be ethically justifiable, i.e., possessing weapons of mass destruction, another might, such as the “War on Terror” claim.  Post the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Centre in New York City and the United States at large, the U.S. federal government had “wide latitude to use violence as an instrument of foreign policy.”  It laid the public groundwork for the invasion by making several sweeping claims about Iraq that include but are not limited to the country demonstrating “an unrelenting hostility toward the United States,”  “[being a] grave and gather threat,”  and “aid[ing] and protect[ing] terrorists.”  These 2001 tensions when President Bush sought to leverage U.S. military power to destroy “every terrorist group of global reach”  culminated in his 2002 State of the Union address, when he referred to Iraq as forming the core of the Axis of Evil.  While the link between Saddam Hussein and terrorist organizations like Al Qaeda was extremely tenuous at best,  it was quite the successful campaign at the time given that tensions were running high in the aftermath of 9/11: by mid-2003, 70 percent of Americans surveyed believed that Iraq played a direct role in planning the attacks.  Regardless, intelligence officials worldwide have concluded that there was no credible evidence supporting the connection.  As such, since the “War on Terror” justification is both factually unsubstantiated,  as well as follows the same invalid line of reasoning as the claim about weapons of mass destruction, i.e., self-defense as a preemptive war,  it cannot stand as ethically justifiable grounds for the invasion of Iraq.
Especially important here is to acknowledge the consequence to other governments whose sovereign dominion terrorists operate within: “[are] they equally culpable as the group and thus justifiably a target, or equally endangered as the United States and thus justifiably in need of U.S. support?”  It could have been the case that Iraq, too, was a victim of terror, in which case, its citizens would have needed protection rather than greater instability. What the Bush Administration didn’t account for, was that a “sovereign’s sovereignty” is inherently distinct from the “people’s sovereignty.”  As United States Permanent Representative Thomas Pickeringe once claimed, “the people, not governments, are sovereign,” i.e., have dominion over themselves.  This consideration is particularly weighty because it elucidates the impression that there were predominantly covert motives underlying the “liberation” of Iraq.  These later became post hoc and ex post facto claims about Saddam Hussein, namely that he was an “evil,”  “murderous tyrant,”  and “ruthless dictator,”  all of which critics claim were retroactively presented.  If you want an example of this, simply look to the July 2003 hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, when former Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz predominantly discussed Hussein’s human rights record during his testimony.  Senator Lincoln Chafee noted that

… in the months leading up to the war it was a steady drum beat of weapons of mass destruction, weapons of mass destruction, weapons of mass destruction. And, Secretary Wolfowitz, in your almost hour-long testimony here this morning, once – only once did you mention weapons of mass destruction, and that was an ad lib. 

What is relevant here is that the criticism about the morally right intention for the invasion being so prominent was because the 2003 war in Iraq was “the first time a group of intervening states have justified their actions by referring to the humanitarian outcomes that were produced by acts primarily motivated by non-humanitarian concerns.”  Some suggest that if the true reason behind the invasion was the welfare of the Iraqi people, then the United States would have been better prepared to “fill the security vacuum” that overthrowing a country’s government would have created.  These consequences were further exacerbated when the U.S. administrator to Iraq Paul Bremer III demobilized the defenses of the country, including the army, police force, and national guard.  Here, it is important to question whether or not the ethical justifiability of a particular action decreases depending on how sincere the motives behind it are. If so, then the fundamental rights of Iraqi citizens being subsidiary grounds for intervention would significantly undermine the legitimacy of the war. 
Either way, just cause can be assessed by examining the history of Hussein’s rule. Under his direction, the Ba’ath party used “violence, killing, torture, execution, arbitrary arrest, unlawful detention, enforced disappearance, and various forms of repression to control the population.”  Hussein himself has a long history of violating human rights as seen in the ethnic cleansing of the Kurds and Shi’ites, genocide, and mass rape.  According to Walzer and numerous scholars across the world, such cases warrant the use of force by legitimate states to defend those being threatened and by extension, constitute just cause for war.  Of course, humanitarian intervention carries the same caveat as does self-defense: that the occurrence of the atrocities is imminent.  Not all suffering rises to the level of that which justifies intervention.  An example of that which does is the 1988 Anfal genocide of hundreds of thousands of Kurds by way of chemical warfare.  Executive Director of Human Rights Watch and attorney Kenneth Roth concluded that “Saddam was not engaged in the type of killing near this magnitude” and that a “‘better late than never’ argument is not consistent with just cause.” 
Legal scholar Fernando Tesón agrees, and argues that humanitarian intervention is justified even at the cost of sovereignty.  He draws on Aquinas’ Just War Theory, where “the war to repel an aggressor is a justified war in national self-defense:” 

Just as national self-defense is justified as a defense of persons (myself and my compatriots) against an aggressor, so humanitarian intervention is justified as a defense of persons (foreigners) against their own government. Self-defense and humanitarian intervention have the same rationale. While there are important differences between them, it is misleading to consider self-defense as a defensive war and humanitarian intervention as an offensive war. Both wars inside defense and defense of others (humanitarian interventions) are wars in defense of persons. The main difference between the two is that when the country is attacked the government has a duty to fight, grounding a fiduciary obligation to its citizens – after all, one of the raisons d’être of government is to defend us. A humanitarian intervention, on the contrary, generates in principle only a permission to act, because the intervenor is not bound to foreigners in the same way and thus cannot lightly impose costs on its citizens to save others. 

The parallel between self-defense and humanitarian intervention is interesting,  because the latter, if considered to be its own “species of war,” is initiated by foreign states.  This must necessarily put the intervener in an offensive position, because they were not the one originally subject to aggression. As such, the “defense of others” must be rooted in a moral obligation to act, and not solely undertaken when permission is granted by the “other.”  By contrast, international relations scholar Nicholas Wheeler cogently postulated that the intervener’s motives are not relevant to adjudicating the legitimacy of an intervention;  what is relevant is whether or not the end result was positive.  The crux of this argument rests on the assumption that consequences determine what is ethical and what is not. Importantly, Just War Theory, the lens through which this case has been interpreted, accounts for both intentions and consequences.  However, in doing so, Aquinas makes prescriptive claims about how judgments should be made, as opposed to descriptive claims about how judgments are, in fact, made. For one, humans and institutions do not make decisions basis one cause and one cause only, as is evident from the aforementioned threefold rationale behind the invasion of Iraq. Secondly, insofar as their motives are mixed, they cannot be guided by pure reason as angels, for example, would be. Thus, the doctrine borders on the cusp of normative and analytical philosophy, rendering it an almost impossible ideal to achieve.
Still, taking a contemporary approach would account for this, in which case the ethical just cause must be the dominant one in accordance with which the decision to go to war was made, because “it affects numerous decisions made in the course of an intervention and its aftermath that can determine its success in saving people from harm.”  Thus, this ethical inquiry into the rationale behind the United States of America’s invasion of Iraq demonstrates the disparity between legitimately treating it as “just a war” that violated international humanitarian law, and illegitimately treating it as a “Just War.”

Citations

  Ngai, Ting Chun. “Was Iraq War a ‘Just War’ or Just a War? An Analysis from the Perspectives of Just War Theory.” Open Journal of Political Science, vol. 9, no. 2, 15 Apr. 2019, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.4236/ojps.2019.92020. pp. 373–382.
  Anonymous. “SC/7658: Briefing Security Council, US Secretary of State Powell Presents Evidence of Iraq’s Failure to Disarm.” Meetings Coverage and Press Releases | Security Council, United Nations, 5 Feb. 2003, https://press.un.org/en/2003/sc7658.doc.htm. 
  Anonymous. “Timeline: The Iraq War.” Foreign Affairs, Council on Foreign Relations, 2011, https://www.cfr.org/timeline/iraq-war. 
  Krieger, David. “The War on Iraq as Illegal and Illegitimate.” Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 15 Mar. 2005, https://www.wagingpeace.org/the-war-on-iraq-as-illegal-and-illegitimate/. 
  Ibid.
  Hastert, J. Dennis. “Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002.” Public Law 107–243, United States Congress, 16 Oct. 2002, https://www.congress.gov/107/plaws/publ243/PLAW-107publ243.pdf. 
  Morgenthau, Hans J. “Chapter 6, Political Power: A Realist Theory of International Politics.” Politics Among Nations, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, NY, 1973, pp. 39–40. 
“Realism maintains that universal moral principles cannot be applied to the actions of states in their abstract universal formulation, but that they must be filtered through the concrete circumstances of time and place. The individual may say for himself: “Fiat justitia, pereat mundus (Let justice be done, even if the world perish),” but the state has no right to say so in the name of those who are in its care. Both individual and state must judge political action by universal moral principles, such as that of liberty. Yet while the individual has a moral right to sacrifice himself in defense of such a moral principle, the state has no right to let its moral disapprobation of the infringement of liberty get in the way of successful political action, itself inspired by the moral principle of national survival. There can be no political morality without prudence; that is, without consideration of the political consequences of seemingly moral action. Realism, then, considers prudence the weighing of the consequences of alternative political actions to be the supreme virtue in politics. Ethics in the abstract judges action by its conformity with the moral law; political ethics judges action by its political consequences…”
  Ibid., p. 40.
  Ibid., p. 39.
  Ibid.
  Ibid., p. 40.
  Aquinas, St. Thomas. “Part II, Section 2, Question 40, Article 1: Whether it is always sinful to wage war?” Summa Theologica, Benziger Bros. ed., Christian Classics Ethereal Library, Notre Dame, IN, 1947. https://ccel.org/ccel/a/aquinas/summa/cache/summa.pdf. p. 3074.
  Ibid.
  Ibid., pp. 3074-3076.
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 160.
“The classical formulation advanced by Aquinas emphasized retribution: ‘a just cause is required namely that those who are attacked deserve it for some wrong they have done’ (1952: XL, 1).”
  Anonymous. “Just War Theory.” Wikipedia, 3 Sept. 2022, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just_war_theory#Criteria. 
  Moseley, Alexander. “Just War Theory.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, United Kingdom, https://iep.utm.edu/justwar/#H2.
  Ibid.
  Ibid.
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 158.
  Miller, Jon. “Hugo Grotius.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 8 Jan. 2021, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/grotius/. 
  Ibid.
  Grotius, Hugo, et al. “Chapter 1, Section II, Justifiable Causes of War Are, When for Defence; the Recovery of One’s Property, or One’s Debt; or for the Punishment of an Offence Committed.” On the Law of War and Peace, 2nd ed., Oceana Publication, New York, NY, 1964, p. 393.
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 159.
“Francisco Suárez added that a just war must represent a proportional response to the wrong a state is attempting to right. Thus, cruel acts on the part of aggressors do not necessarily give others the moral right to wage war (Suárez, 1944: 805, 817).”
  Ibid.
“Although Balthasar Ayala agreed that a just war must be initiated by a legitimate authority, he claimed that rulers must also possess rightful intentions. For Ayala, rightful intentions involve ‘an entire absence of passion to do hurt and of vengeful savagery and of the lust of conquest’ (1912: 10-11). This added a measure of possibility because a legitimate authority could justifiably claim just cause but possess unjust and wrongful intentions in resorting to war. The goal of a just war should be so that ‘peace may appear to be its sole object’ (Ayala, 1912: 8).”
  Ibid., p. 160.
  Ibid.
  International Law Commission. “Principles of International Law Recognized in the Charter of the Nürnberg Tribunal and in the Judgment of the Tribunal.” Legal Documents, United Nations, 1950, https://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/draft_articles/7_1_1950.pdf. 
  Anonymous. “Chapter I: Purposes and Principles (Article 2 Section 4).” United Nations Charter, United Nations, 26 June 1945, https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/chapter-1. 
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.”
  Kramer, Ronald C., and Michalowski, Raymond J. “War, Aggression, and State Crime: A Criminological Analysis of the Invasion and Occupation of Iraq.” The British Journal of Criminology, vol. 45, no. 4, 2005, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23639249. p. 448.
  MacAskill, Ewen, and Borger, Julian. “Iraq War Was Illegal and Breached UN Charter, Says Annan.” Washington News and Media, The Guardian, 15 Sept. 2004, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/16/iraq.iraq. 
  Kirgis, Frederic L. “Security Council Resolution 1441 on Iraq’s Final Opportunity to Comply with Disarmament Obligations.” Volume 7, Issue 12: Insights, American Society of International Law, 10 Nov. 2002, https://www.asil.org/insights/volume/7/issue/12/security-council-resolution-1441-iraqs-final-opportunity-comply. 
  Anonymous. “Resolution 1441.” Security Council, United Nations, 8 Nov. 2002, https://www.un.org/depts/unmovic/documents/1441.pdf. 
  Powers, Gerard F. “An Ethical Analysis of War Against Iraq.” Policy & Advocacy, United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Dec. 2002, https://www.usccb.org/resources/ethical-analysis-war-against-iraq-december-2002. 
  Leaman, George. “Iraq, American Empire, and the War on Terrorism.” Metaphilosophy, vol. 35, no. 3, 2004, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/24439548. p. 234.
“Misleading and apparently false statements about the Iraq threat to the United States were made by George W. Bush on the following occasions: “Address to the Nation,” Mar. 17, 2003; “State of the Union Address,” Jan. 28, 2003; “President Bush Outlines Iraqi Threat,” Remarks by the President on Iraq at the Cincinnati Museum Center, Oct. 7, 2002; “Iraqi Regime Danger to America is Grave and Growing,” Radio Address by the President to the Nation, Oct. 5, 2002; United Nations Address, Sept. 12, 2002. The failure to find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq raises the possibility that President Bush lied to Congress and the public about the reasons for going to war with Iraq. If so, he may be legally vulnerable to a federal charge of conspiracy under Title 18, Section 371, of the United States Code. See John W. Dean, “Missing Weapons Of Mass Destruction: Is Lying About The Reason For War An Impeachable Offense?” FindLaw’s Writ: Legal Commentary, June 6, 2003, at www.findlaw.com.”
  Bush, George W. “President Bush Outlines Iraqi Threat.” Denial and Deception, National Archives and Records Administration, 7 Oct. 2002, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/10/20021007-8.html. 
“The Iraqi dictator must not be permitted to threaten America and the world with horrible poisons and diseases and gases and atomic weapons.”
  Kucinich, Dennis. “House Resolution 799: Impeaching Richard B. Cheney, Vice President of the United States, of High Crimes and Misdemeanors.” Congressional Bills (110th Congress), U.S. Government Publishing Office, 6 Nov. 2007, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/BILLS-110hres799ih/html/BILLS-110hres799ih.htm. 
“There is no doubt that Saddam Hussein now has weapons of mass destruction.”
  Powell, Colin L. “Remarks to the United Nations Security Council.” Archive, U.S. Department of State, 5 Feb. 2003, https://2001-2009.state.gov/secretary/former/powell/remarks/2003/17300.htm. 
“… the facts and Iraq’s behavior show that Saddam Hussein and his regime are concealing their efforts to produce more weapons of mass destruction.”
  DeYoung, Karen. “A Rhetorical Weave on Iraq.” The Washington Post, 5 Dec. 2002, https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/12/05/a-rhetorical-weave-on-iraq/b71bba50-c79f-43e2-ae7e-ff630143d345/. 
“Any country on the face of the earth with an active intelligence program knows Iraq has weapons of mass destruction.”
  Mueller, Robert S. “War on Terrorism.” Testimony Archives, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 11 Feb. 2003, https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/news/testimony/war-on-terrorism. 
“Iraq has moved to the top of my list. As we previously briefed this Committee, Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction program pose a clear threat to our national security, a threat that will certainly increase in the event of future military action against Iraq. Baghdad has the capability and, we presume, the will to use biological, chemical, or radiological weapons against US domestic targets in the event of a US invasion.” 
  Busby, John C. “M’Naghten Rule.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 9 June 2022, https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/m%27naghten_rule.
  Fleischer, Ari. “Press Briefing with Ari Fleischer.” Internet Archive Wayback Machine, The White House, 10 Apr. 2003, https://web.archive.org/web/20120715091357/http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2003/04/20030410-6.html. 
“But make no mistake – as I said earlier – we have high confidence that they have weapons of mass destruction. That is what this war was about, and it is about. And we have high confidence it will be found.” 
  Baradei, Mohamed El. “The Status of Nuclear Inspections in Iraq: An Update.” Statements, International Atomic Energy Agency, 7 Mar. 2003, https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/statements/status-nuclear-inspections-iraq-update. 
  Blix, Hans. “UN Inspectors Found No Evidence of Prohibited Weapons Programmes as Of 18 March Withdrawal, Hans Blix Tells Security Council.” Meetings Coverage and Press Releases, United Nations Security Council, 5 June 2003, https://press.un.org/en/2003/sc7777.doc.htm. 
  Pike, John. “Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD).” Iraq Survey Group Final Report, Global Security, 30 Sept. 2004, http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/report/2004/isg-final-report/isg-final-report_vol1_rsi-06.htm. 
  Rycroft, Matthew. “The Secret Downing Street Memo.” Archives, George Washington University, 23 July 2002, https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB328/II-Doc14.pdf. 
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 160.
“The use of preemptive force may be legitimate when invoked to obviate an imminent threat that has yet to strike. James Wirtz and James Russell describe preemption as ‘upon detecting evidence that an opponent is about to attack, one beats the opponent to the punch and attacks first to blunt the impending strike’ (2003: 4).”
  Bush, George W. “U.S. National Security Strategy: Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us, Our Allies, and Our Friends with Weapons of Mass Destruction.” Archive, U.S. Department of State, 1 June 2002, https://2001-2009.state.gov/r/pa/ei/wh/15425.htm. 
  Anonymous. “Chapter VII: Action with Respect to Threats to the Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression (Article 51).” United Nations Charter, United Nations, 26 June 1945, https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/chapter-7. 
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and security.”
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 160.
  Ibid.
  Anonymous. “Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).” Office for Disarmament Affairs, United Nations, 1 July 1968, https://www.un.org/disarmament/wmd/nuclear/npt/text. 
  Newport, Frank. “Seventy-Two Percent of Americans Support War Against Iraq.” Politics, Gallup News Service, 4 Mar. 2003, https://news.gallup.com/poll/8038/seventytwo-percent-americans-support-war-against-iraq.aspx. 
  Dolan, Chris J. “Waging War against Iraq: Jus Ad Bellum Considerations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 1, no. 2, Oct. 2005, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1743453X0500100204. p. 161.
  Krieger, David. “The War on Iraq as Illegal and Illegitimate.” Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 15 Mar. 2005, https://www.wagingpeace.org/the-war-on-iraq-as-illegal-and-illegitimate/. 
  Betts, Richard K. Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning. Brookings Institution, 1982. p. 14.
  Krieger, David. “The War on Iraq as Illegal and Illegitimate.” Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 15 Mar. 2005, https://www.wagingpeace.org/the-war-on-iraq-as-illegal-and-illegitimate/.
  Locke, John. “Chapter II, Of the State of Nature.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. p. 13.
“It is often asked as a mighty objection, where are, or ever were there any men in such a state of nature? To which it may suffice as an answer at present, that since all princes and rulers of independent governments all through the world, are in a state of nature, it is plain the world never was, nor ever will be, without numbers of men in that state. I have named all governors of independent communities, whether they are, or are not, in league with others: for it is not every compact that puts an end to the state of nature between men, but only this one of agreeing together mutually to enter into one community, and make one body politic; other promises, and compacts, men may make one with another, and yet still be in the state of nature. The promises and bargains for truck, &c. between the two men in the desert island, mentioned by Garcilasso de la Vega, in his history of Peru; or between a Swiss and an Indian, in the woods of America, are binding to them, though they are perfectly in a state of nature, in reference to one another: for truth and keeping of faith belongs to men, as men, and not as members of society.”
  Keating, Vincent Charles, and Ruzicka, Jan. “Trusting Relationships in International Politics: No Need to Hedge.” Review of International Studies, vol. 40, no. 4, 2014, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/24564319. pp. 753–770.
  Anonymous. “Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons.” United Nations Digital Library, U.N. General Assembly (51st Session 1996-1997), 1996, https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/230996?ln=en. 
  Kramer, Ronald, et al. “‘The Supreme International Crime’: How the U.S. War in Iraq Threatens the Rule of Law.” Social Justice, vol. 32, no. 2 (100), 2005, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/29768307. p. 58.
  Clausewitz, Carl von, and Brodie, Bernard. “Chapter One, Section 24, War Is Merely the Continuation of Policy by Other Means.” On War, Book One: On the Nature of War, edited by Michael Howard, translated by Peter Paret, Indexed ed., Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 1989, p. 87.
  Clausewitz, Carl von, and Brodie, Bernard. “Chapter Two, Absolute War and Real War.” On War, Book Eight: War Plans, edited by Michael Howard, translated by Peter Paret, Indexed ed., Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 1989, p. 579.
  Krieger, David. “The War on Iraq as Illegal and Illegitimate.” Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 15 Mar. 2005, https://www.wagingpeace.org/the-war-on-iraq-as-illegal-and-illegitimate/.
  Ibid.
  Ibid.
  Dunn, David Hastings. “Bush, 11 September, and the Conflicting Strategies of the ‘War on Terrorism.’” Irish Studies in International Affairs, vol. 16, 2005, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/30001932. pp. 11–33.
  Peterson, Matt. “Did Iraq Ever Become a Just War?” Global, The Atlantic Media Company, 24 Mar. 2018, https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2018/03/iraq-war-ethics/556448/. 
  Anonymous. “10 Ways the Liberation of Iraq Supports the War on Terror.” Renewal in Iraq: 100 Days of Progress, The White House National Archives and Records Administration, 8 Aug. 2003, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/infocus/iraq/part1.html. 
  Leaman, George. “Iraq, American Empire, and the War on Terrorism.” Metaphilosophy, vol. 35, no. 3, 2004, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/24439548. p. 240.
  Central Intelligence Agency. “Iraq’s Continuing Programs for Weapons of Mass Destruction.” Key Judgments, National Intelligence Estimates, 18 July 2003, https://irp.fas.org/cia/product/iraq-wmd.pdf.  
  Ibid.
  Bush, George W. “President Bush, President Uribe of Colombia Discuss Terrorism and Security.” National Archives and Records Administration, The White House, 4 Aug. 2005, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2005/08/20050804-2.html. 
  PBS News Hour. “President George W. Bush’s Address to a Joint Session of Congress Following 9/11 (September 20, 2001).” YouTube, 3 Sept. 2021, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZF7cPvaKFXM. 
  Bush, George W. “President Delivers State of the Union Address.” National Archives and Records Administration, The White House, 29 Jan. 2002, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/01/20020129-11.html. 
  Krieger, David. “The War on Iraq as Illegal and Illegitimate.” Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, 15 Mar. 2005, https://www.wagingpeace.org/the-war-on-iraq-as-illegal-and-illegitimate/. 
  Corn, David. “The Lies of George W. Bush: Mastering the Politics of Deception.” Crown Publishers, 2004. 
  Anonymous. “The 9/11 Commission Report.” National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, U.S. Federal Government, 21 Aug. 2004, https://govinfo.library.unt.edu/911/report/911Report_Exec.htm. 
  Anonymous. “10 Ways the Liberation of Iraq Supports the War on Terror.” Renewal in Iraq: 100 Days of Progress, The White House National Archives and Records Administration, 8 Aug. 2003, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/infocus/iraq/part1.html. 
  Kramer, Ronald, et al. “‘The Supreme International Crime’: How the U.S. War in Iraq Threatens the Rule of Law.” Social Justice, vol. 32, no. 2 (100), 2005, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/29768307. pp. 58-59.
  Hudson, Valerie M., and Benjamin S. Day. “Chapter 3, Group Decision-Making, Organizational Process Section.” Foreign Policy Analysis: Classic and Contemporary Theory, 3rd ed., Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD, 2020, p. 88. 
  Huang, Eric Ting-Lun. “The Status of Taiwan Under International Law and in a Changing World.” Golden Gate University School of Law Digital Commons, 25 Dec. 2002, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/233104457.pdf. pp. 159–161. 
  Reisman, W. Michael. “Sovereignty and Human Rights in Contemporary International Law.” The American Journal of International Law, vol. 84, no. 4, 1990, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2202838. p. 874.
  Gilman, Benjamin A. “H.R. 4655 - Iraq Liberation Act of 1998.” Legislation, United States Congress (105th Congress), 29 Sept. 1998, https://www.congress.gov/bill/105th-congress/house-bill/4655. 
  Myers, Brian. “How Saddam Hussein Was Even More Evil Than You Think.” Grunge, 3 Oct. 2021, https://www.grunge.com/622452/how-saddam-hussein-was-even-more-evil-than-you-think/. 
  Switzer, Tom. “Saddam a Tyrant, but War Was Wrong.” The Interpreter, Lowy Institute, 15 Mar. 2013, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/saddam-tyrant-war-was-wrong. 
  Yusuf, Abdullah. “Saddam Hussein: How a Deadly Purge of Opponents Set Up His Ruthless Dictatorship.” Politics + Society, The Conversation, 22 July 2019, https://theconversation.com/saddam-hussein-how-a-deadly-purge-of-opponents-set-up-his-ruthless-dictatorship-120748. 
  Mandel, Michael. “Part I, Chapter 1: Iraq 2003.” How America Gets Away with Murder: Illegal Wars, Collateral Damage and Crimes Against Humanity, Pluto Press, London, UK, 2004, pp. 3–29. 
  Schrader, Esther. “Lawmakers Grill Wolfowitz on Iraq.” Los Angeles Times, 30 July 2003, https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2003-jul-30-fg-costs30-story.html. 
  Ibid.
  Bellamy, Alex J. “Motives, Outcomes, Intent and the Legitimacy of Humanitarian Intervention.” Journal of Military Ethics, vol. 3, no. 3, Nov. 2004, https://doi.org/10.1080/15027570410006192. p. 217.
  Roth, Kenneth. “War in Iraq: Not a Humanitarian Intervention.” Human Rights Watch, 25 Jan. 2004, https://www.hrw.org/news/2004/01/25/war-iraq-not-humanitarian-intervention. 
  Ibid.
  Anonymous. “Crimes Committed During the Regime of Saddam Hussein.” Country Guidance Iraq, European Union Agency for Asylum, Jan. 2021, https://euaa.europa.eu/country-guidance-iraq-2021/crimes-committed-during-regime-saddam-hussein. 
  Wright, Robin. “Iraq War Crimes Dossiers in Works.” Los Angeles Times, 6 Oct. 2002, https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2002-oct-06-fg-warcrimes6-story.html. 
  Walzer, Michael. “Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical IIlustrations.” Basic Books, 1977. p. 59, pp. 101-108.
  Ibid.
  Heinze, Eric A. “Humanitarian Intervention and the War in Iraq: Norms, Discourse, and State Practice.” The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters, vol. 36, no. 1, 1 Mar. 2006, https://doi.org/10.55540/0031-1723.2291. pp. 20–34.
  Anonymous. “Genocide in Iraq: The Anfal Campaign Against the Kurds.” United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Refworld, Human Rights Watch, July 1993, https://www.refworld.org/docid/47fdfb1d0.html. 
  Roth, Kenneth. “War in Iraq: Not a Humanitarian Intervention.” Human Rights Watch, 25 Jan. 2004, https://www.hrw.org/news/2004/01/25/war-iraq-not-humanitarian-intervention.
  Tesón, Fernando R. “Chapter Twenty-Six, The Moral Structure of Humanitarian Intervention.” Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics, edited by Andrew I. Cohen and Christopher Heath Wellman, 2nd ed., Wiley Blackwell, 2014, Contemporary Debates in Philosophy Series. p. 402.
“In short, there is no effective global mechanism to prevent war, and as a result self-help is omnipresent in international relations. Given these institutional failures, and the sobering fact that states and others will continue to murder their own citizens, humanitarian intervention cannot be excluded as the only way, sometimes, to save people.”
  Ibid., p. 392. 
  Ibid. 
  Ibid.
  Ibid., p. 391. 
  Ibid., p. 392.
“… the permission may morph into a moral obligation to intervene. For example, some observers thought that the failure of Western powers to intervene in the Rwandan genocide of 1994 was moral failure.”
  Heinze, Eric A. “Humanitarian Intervention and the War in Iraq: Norms, Discourse, and State Practice.” The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters, vol. 36, no. 1, 1 Mar. 2006, https://doi.org/10.55540/0031-1723.2291. p. 23.
“In an influential study on humanitarian intervention, however, Nicholas Wheeler cogently put forth the argument that we need not consider the motives of the interveners in judging the legitimacy of an intervention, but rather whether or not the intervention achieved a positive humanitarian outcome. Wheeler suggests that preoccupation with the motives of the interveners “takes the intervening state as the referent object for analysis rather than the victims who are rescued as a consequence of the use of force.” According to this thinking, placing the victims at the center of the analysis, as opposed to the interveners, “leads to a different emphasis on the importance of motives in judging the humanitarian credentials of the interveners.” What matters, then, is whether the intervention in fact promotes human rights, not whether the resort to force was motivated out of a desire to do so.”
Wheeler, Nicholas J. “Part I: Theories of Humanitarian Intervention, Chapter 1: Humanitarian Intervention and International Society.” Saving Strangers, Oxford University Press, Inc., New York, NY, 2003, pp. 37–38. 
  Ibid.
  Aquinas, St. Thomas. “Part II, Section 2, Question 40, Article 1: Whether it is always sinful to wage war?” Summa Theologica, Benziger Bros. ed., Christian Classics Ethereal Library, Notre Dame, IN, 1947. https://ccel.org/ccel/a/aquinas/summa/cache/summa.pdf. pp. 3074-3076.
  Roth, Kenneth. “War in Iraq: Not a Humanitarian Intervention.” Human Rights Watch, 25 Jan. 2004, https://www.hrw.org/news/2004/01/25/war-iraq-not-humanitarian-intervention.
  Ngai, Ting Chun. “Was Iraq War a ‘Just War’ or Just a War? An Analysis from the Perspectives of Just War Theory.” Open Journal of Political Science, vol. 9, no. 2, 15 Apr. 2019, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.4236/ojps.2019.92020. pp. 373–382.