How to Kill a Democracy: A Critique of the Eight-Step Method to the Madness

The less a person knows about the workings of the institutions in his society, the more he must trust those who wield power in it; and the more he trusts those who wield such power, the more vulnerable he makes himself to becoming their victim…  [because] all political institutions are manifestations and materializations of power; they petrify and decay as soon as the living power of the people ceases to uphold them.  [After all,] every great institution is the lengthened shadow of [each] man; his character determines the character of the [franchise]. 

Alas, what is at stake today in 21st century America is not just the policy preferences of the people,  but the democratic institutions themselves that have empowered us “to form a more perfect Union.”  Ever since the birth of the United States, generations have had to “defend [the Constitution], protect it, preserve it, choose it, for that is what democracy is: it’s a choice – a decision of the people, by the people, and for the people.”  Democracy ebbs and flows, going unnoticed, until one day, it doesn’t, and the world sits by wondering why. That day will arrive,  and when it does, it will neither be the result of passive erosion  nor constitutional retrogression;  rather, it would be the culmination of a series of conscious choices made to assault the principles upon which our country was founded.  
The most fundamental cornerstone of the U.S. government is the division and separation of powers,  a “tripartite system” derived from Enlightenment political philosopher Baron de Montesquieu, that distributes political authority among an executive (head of the armed forces and executer of law ), a legislature (representatives of the people that pass laws), and a judiciary (adjudicator of conflicts between institutions and interpreter of the Constitution through judicial review).  These three branches of government must perform their own separate functions  for a legitimate system of checks and balances to subsist,  which Founding Father James Madison codified in Federalist Papers 47  and 51.  According to this system, each institution limits the power of the other two to prevent either from exercising undue influence over both the other branches  and the citizenry.  The United States Constitution, the “supreme Law of the Land,”  is the founding document into which checks and balances are built, be they the courts assessing the constitutionality of legislative bills,  the bicameral Congress curbing legislative dominance,  the impeachment authority to inhibit abuses of power,  the Presidential veto limiting congressional overreach,  or the Senate’s role in non-self-executing treaties checking the executive.  Each of these mechanisms works in tandem to organize a democracy that requires participation,  presumes disagreement,  and is grounded on institutions that are both “trustworthy and trusted.”  
Trust, then, is the bedrock of sound public governance and healthy legal systems.  As such, the interactions between politics and law serve a twofold purpose, the first of which is a progressive function, i.e., to “encourage and suppress the development of societal relations;” the second is to safeguard constitutional principles.  Insofar as entities abide by laws that are equally applied to everyone, they are operating within the widely accepted  Rule of Law: 

… a set of principles or ideals for ensuring an orderly and just society… where everyone is held accountable to the same laws, there are clear and fair processes for enforcing laws, there is an independent judiciary, and human rights are guaranteed for all. 

H. L. A. Hart furthered the notion of legitimate order through his rule of recognition, which holds special importance in a democracy.  The rule of recognition is a pedigree test that provides the criteria of legal validity by determining which laws are legitimate and which are not.  According to it,

… enactments by the Queen in Parliament are not law because of their moral credentials, or because of any logical presupposition, but because an actually practiced customary rule recognizes them as such… [they] have an ‘internal aspect’ involving a complex attitude Hart calls acceptance, i.e., a willingness to use the regularity as a standard to guide and appraise behavior, especially to commend conformity and criticize breaches, and to treat such commendation and criticism as appropriate. Acceptance does not require approval; It is not a matter of how people feel about the rule but of their willingness to use it, either by consent or tacitly, by assenting to it. 

This legal authority is one we find in Article VII of the U.S. Constitution: in ratifying it, states, and thereby American citizens, expressly consented to acting in accordance with it.  In what follows, I will offer substantial philosophical, jurisprudential, and pragmatic analyses of the history and traditions of the United States of America for the purpose of illustrating various relations between politics and law. Ultimately, I argue that certain relations, namely the unified sovereign doctrine, independent state legislature theory, and pure judicial supremacy, pose existential threats to democracy. In so doing, I posit that it is incumbent upon the U.S. to methodically reinstate its governmental institutions with democratic norms and principles. After all, as Bob Proctor posited, “accountability is the glue that ties commitment to the result.” 

Case I: How to Kill a Democracy with the Unified Sovereign Doctrine

  In his seminal work, Leviathan, Thomas Hobbes proposed consolidating governmental power in a unified sovereign, i.e., “an effective and efficient executive that is able to protect the safety of the people and avoid anarchy.”  In the Hobbesian conception, a hierarchy of status exists between the sovereign and his subjects, such that the latter lay down their arms in submission to the former, who provides closure to the regress of political authority.  The people place their trust in the sovereign to aid them in escaping the state of nature, which is “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,”  securing them from the “continuall feare, and danger of violent death.”  This trust, then, serves as a substitute for constitutional constraints;  no checks and balances are instituted to limit the power of the sovereign.  
  Given that the people have forfeited their absolute liberty in exchange for the protection of their life, Hobbes’ sovereign is inherently paternalistic.  This “interference of [the] state… with an individual… motivated by a claim that the person interfered with will be better off,”  has subverted what Hobbes originally designed as a social contract  into what has contemporarily come to be recognized as the regime of a benevolent dictator.  Under this conception, laws can be interpreted as commands that citizens are obliged to follow.  These commands are consonant with those behavioristically articulated by J. L. Austin in his seminal work, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined, i.e., orders backed by the threat of force or sanction.  Here, it is the imperative nature of the laws that fosters habitual obedience,  one that philosophers and legal scholars alike have condemned as a form of governmental overreach.  

Step #1 – Abuse your Power

  Now there are times at which the state deems it necessary to abridge its citizens’ civil liberties.  Social contract theorists like John Locke recognize that

… “since… the lawmaking power… is usually too numerous and too slow for the dispatch requisite to execution; and because it is impossible to foresee, and so by laws to provide for all accidents and necessities”   that may arise in times of emergency, the prerogative to act for the public good is placed in the hands of the executive. In this way, the executive is able to act for the public good “without the prescription of law,”   and, in some cases… against it. 

In these circumstances, the sovereign, or President’s prerogative is executed through “regulatory,” “interpretive,” or “gap-filling” power.  What is necessary to determine the right approach to such cases are principles of law, such as justice, fairness, equality, liberty, privacy, and the like.  This is because the legislature of no country can possibly write a law articulating every single case that might present itself before the judiciary.  It is for this reason that jurisprudential philosopher Ronald Dworkin articulates 

Law as integrity denies that statements of law are either the backward-looking factual reports of conventionalism or the forward-looking instrumental programs of legal pragmatism. It insists that legal claims are interpretive judgments and therefore combine backward- and forward-looking elements; They interpret contemporary legal practice seen as an unfolding political narrative. So law as integrity rejects as unhelpful the ancient question whether judges find or invent law; We understand legal reasoning, it suggests, only by seeing the sense in which they do both and neither… According to law as integrity, propositions of law are true if they figure in or follow from the principles of justice, fairness, and procedural due process that provide the best constructive interpretation of the community’s legal practice. 

However, staunch pragmatist leaders are at a high risk of abusing their power, and such regimes swiftly devolve into treating their citizens as means to an end, where they “are willing to sacrifice… any and all democratic processes.”   Insofar as human beings are rational and equal, they would not be willing to illegitimately surrender their autonomy, liberty, or bodily integrity to another.  After all, in a democracy, the people must have the right to dissent, to share contrarian perspectives, and build more resilient institutions, none of which would be permissible under the unified sovereign doctrine. 
Further, when the sovereign flagrantly disregards legal principles, and interprets the law as an obstacle in its realization of political goals, the struggle between politics and law will inevitably result in the former prevailing over the latter.  The notion of institutional forbearance best elucidates this, through its condemnation of the problems of “actions that, while respecting the letter of the law, obviously violate its spirit,”  because as Locke rightly articulates it, “where-ever law ends, tyranny begins.”  This consequence is especially exacerbated when the sovereign simultaneously legislates, executes, and administers the law.  Without checks and balances to counter exercises of illegitimate authority, the “equilibrium between trustful constitutional cooperation and constitutional mechanisms of distrust” is disturbed.  Ultimately, the result is a despotic authoritarian institution that “peacefully, slowly, [and] legally” chips away at the separation of powers in an unprecedented way,  thereby subverting the Rule of Law integral to democracy into a Rule of Man by decree, as

The United States may be a nation of laws, but the proper functioning of the law depends upon the competence and integrity of those charged with executing it. A president determined to thwart the law in order to protect himself and those in his circle has many means to do so. 
Step #2 – Reject the Transfer of Power

  The peaceful transfer of power refers to the transition from one Administration to the next.  It represents the stability of a governmental line of succession, and is a core tenet of democracy, because a constitutional regime grounded on the Rule of Law is founded upon a shared commitment to order.  Hart’s Legal Positivism establishes law as a social construct grounded in rules to maintain this order.  He draws an important distinction between primary and secondary rules for the purpose of demonstrating that law itself is a union of these social rules,  wherein secondary rules articulate how laws must be executed.  The transfer of power is one such secondary rule that outlines the procedural policies regulating political administration.  As such, respecting rules is equivalent to respecting the values of democracy, which far outweighs the outcomes of partisan politics.  As Ice Cube poignantly affirmed, “You win some, you lose some. But you live, you live to fight another day.” 
Unfortunately, the United States witnessed the antithesis to these ideals on January 6, 2021, when a mob of former President Donald Trump’s supporters attacked The Capitol in Washington, D.C. to prevent a joint session of Congress from counting the electoral college votes certifying the victory of President-elect Joe Biden.  Back in 2017, historian Timothy Snyder had famously promulgated a bleak prophecy of tyrannical paramilitaries and “dangerous words:” 

When the men with guns who have always claimed to be against the system start wearing uniforms and marching with torches and pictures of a leader, the end is nigh. When the pro- leader paramilitary and the official police and military intermingle, the end has come…  Be alert to the use of the words extremism and terrorism. Be alive to the fatal notions of emergency and exception. Be angry about the treacherous use of patriotic vocabulary. 

The events that transpired on January 6 brought Snyder’s warning to life: Trump called on far right-wing mobs, including the Oath Keepers militia and the Proud Boys, to “fight like hell” to overturn the election.  The Committee hearings revealed extensive damage to property,  disorderly conduct,  violent entry,  weapons offenses,  threats to law enforcement officers,  and the use of tear gas at The Capitol.  According to the Partnership for Public Services’ Center for Presidential Transition, the transfer of power already had the potential to be “big, complicated, and dangerous;”  waging war on democracy when it was at its most vulnerable only aggravated this prospect, posing an existential threat to the United States.  If this domestic rebellion would have gone to the extent of interfering with the functions of governmental institutions (which it was on the verge of), it would be incumbent upon the legislature to declare an “emergency,”  thereby suspending the citizenry’s right of habeas corpus.  However, given that the coup occurred at The Capitol, the executive would have had to exercise his oath-of-office-based prerogative to suspend habeas corpus in lieu of the legislature.  Given that Trump was the aforementioned executive at the time, and had himself incited the violence that occurred, he could very well have used the opportunity to declare Martial Law to indefinitely, arbitrarily, and illegitimately establish himself as the authoritarian sovereign “President.”  Ultimately, eleven members of the Oath Keepers and other far-right militias were charged with seditious conspiracy  for “forcibly opposing the authority of the federal government… and blocking the execution of laws governing the transfer of presidential power,”  such as the Electoral Count Act  and the Twelfth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  
  It is this problem of continuity that Hart highlights to demonstrate why Austin’s Theory fails to provide a valid foundation for a legitimate legal system:  when legal authority is vested in a person, and not an office, the power to make law will necessarily be interrupted at a certain point in time.  Hart observes that

The mere fact that there was a general habit of obedience to Rex I in his lifetime does not by itself even render probable that Rex II will be habitually obeyed… Acceptance of a rule by a society at one moment does not guarantee its continued existence… Even if we concede that a person, such as Rex, whose general orders are habitually obeyed, may be called a legislator and his orders laws, habits of obedience to each of a succession of such legislators are not enough to account for the right of a successor to succeed and for the consequent continuity and legislative power. 

Under Trump’s rule, then, the democratic transfer of power would inevitably result in this discontinuity of authority.  In these cases, the U.S. legal system would lack persistence, and thus fail to be legitimate. 

Step #3 – Avoid Being Held Accountable

  Sovereign leaders are able to maintain methods of governance that silently erode institutions and democratic principles in a fivefold manner, with citizens retreating away from the public sphere,  “critics grow[ing] quieter, cynicism becom[ing] endemic,”  corruption pervading society in an increasingly brazen manner,  and political opponents being intimidated or strong-armed into conceding.  As such, “the benefit of controlling a modern state is less the power to persecute the innocent, more the power to protect the guilty.”  With no system of checks and balances in place under the unified sovereign doctrine, such leaders are able to circumvent being held accountable for their actions. For example, Trump was twice shielded from impeachment,  as well as protected from prosecution for a wide range of criminal charges,  including obstruction of justice with the classified documents at Mar-a-Lago,  campaign finance crimes,  incitement of violence,  corruption by fraud,  seditious conspiracy,  violation of free and fair elections,  and more. The January 6 Committee and Justice Department’s recent hearings are testament to the fact that democracy persists insofar as its guardrails are preserved.  

 Step #4 – Manipulate Rhetoric

  Populist and tyrannical executives alike have a vested interest in exploiting the power of language to maintain control over their citizenry.  Hobbes finds “the tongue of man [to be] a trumpet of war and sedition,” one which can be used as a political weapon to further discord in society.  For this reason, leaders like Trump acting in accordance with the unified sovereign doctrine use “doublespeak,” a method of obfuscating and manipulating the truth that George Orwell’s 1984 portrays to be a “precursor to totalitarian government.”  Here, politicians use statements to gain the unwavering support of the public in different ways, shapes, and forms, but predominantly by “stat[ing] a claim in one [instance] and then den[ying] it entirely in another.”  In obscuring the real meaning underlying what one is saying by openly embracing contradictions, one prima facie puts oneself in a position to shift advocacy when required.  As such, individuals can once again circumvent accountability. 


Step #5 – Bury the Truth

  Plato accurately asserted, “the sophistry of human nature is far more subtle than the deceit of any one man.”  Rather, it is an institutional mechanism of undermining intellectual culture.  After all, in post-truth eras like that which we live in today, objective facts have significantly less sway over public opinion than appeals to emotion do.  Bending the truth incrementally allows politicians and like leaders to set the frightening precedent of a lack of “truth and keeping of faith,” a core tenet of the social contract we have signed onto.  As such, 

… there is no single moment that triggers widespread resistance or creates a focal point around which an opposition can coalesce… Piecemeal democratic erosion, therefore, typically provokes only fragmented resistance. 

Given the state of America today, the trust that a democracy presumes has been eroded and must be rebuilt.  Until then, it is likely that paternalistic policies enacted by a unified sovereign will receive immense backlash and be treated as unjustified impositions upon the people’s civil liberties. 
For a better understanding of this, let us look to the “Big Lie” propaganda that Trump and his supporters spread in the months preceding the 2020 presidential election,  “to assert power over truth itself.”  They blatantly abandoned reason and promulgated numerous unsubstantiated claims about the election being “stolen” through fraudulent votes,  despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.  It was these conspiracy theories that formed the basis of his speech at the D.C. rally, following which the mob stormed The Capitol.  To conceal such consequences, then, investigative journalism and other truth-seeking accountability institutions have been framed as partisan in attempts to strip them of their legitimacy.  However, though the leaders of retrogressing democracies “resent an independent press… they cannot extinguish it.”  As Snyder poignantly posited,

Believe in truth, [for] to abandon facts is to abandon freedom. If nothing is true, then no one can criticize power, because there is no basis upon which to do so. If nothing is true, then all is spectacle. The biggest wallet pays for the most blinding lights… you submit to tyranny when you renounce the difference between what you want to hear and what is actually the case. This renunciation of reality can feel natural and pleasant, but the result is your demise as an individual – and thus the collapse of any political system that depends upon individualism… demeaning the world as it is begins the creation of a fictional counterworld… post-truth is pre-fascism. 

Case II: How to Kill a Democracy with the Independent State Legislature Theory

  The independent state legislature theory posits that elected Senators and Representatives in states are granted the ability to regulate federal elections without any checks and balances curbing their authority.  They advocate that in cases where the legislature’s policies conflict with their own constitutions, state laws take precedence.  Further, they argue that federal judiciaries have the sole power to resolve such conflicts, and that state governors are not permitted to use their veto power to reject any bills involving federal elections.  In this case, the relation between politics and law is such that the former defines the values or institutions of the latter as its goal.  As such, the political understanding of the state becomes conjoined with and equivalent to the legal understanding of the state. 
Proponents of the theory claim to enjoy jurisprudential backing, citing the Elections Clause  and Electors Clause of the U.S. Constitution,  as well as philosophical backing, citing Locke’s conception of legislative supremacy.  The notion of absolute legislative sovereignty is grounded in British common law, a “cardinal principle” of which is that the authority of a statute comprising people’s rights and duties is bound to what is written in black letter.  According to this approach, the intentions of the legislators are pertinent only insofar as they “illuminate the text.”  Legal scholar Michael Morley supplements this justification for the theory by offering various pragmatic arguments.  These include allowing state legislatures the flexibility of being responsive to local needs,  attributing the responsibility for regulating elections solely to the political branch of government,  “preserv[ing] the shared and symmetrical power to regulate federal elections between Congress and state legislatures,”  and ensuring uniformity in the application of referendum laws across the country.  

Step #6 – Circumvent Checks and Balances

The Founding Fathers of the United States would beg to differ from the rationale behind the independent state legislature theory on the grounds that it opposes the very principles of democracy.  At the Constitutional Convention, James Wilson expressed his apprehension at the government dissolving “from the Legislature swallowing up all the other powers.”  According to him, since Congress (be it at the federal or state level) possessed the primary law-making authority and directly reflected the will of the people, it was the most likely to usurp the power of the other branches of government in “think[ing that] their will [was] the only law.”  For this reason, rather than viewing the separation of powers as a prophylactic measure,  the Fathers established a bicameral legislature with robust internal checks and balances to prevent legislative tyranny;  that was their intent:

The power vested in the American courts of justice of pronouncing a statute to be unconstitutional forms one of the most powerful barriers that have ever been devised against the tyranny of political assemblies. 

Similarly, legal scholar Vikram Amar and political theorist Steven Calabresi argue that the independent state legislature theory misconstrues the concept of the “state legislature” as insulated from other state institutions,  such as their constitutions, courts’ judicial review authority, and gubernatorial vetoes;  instead, they contend that the concept refers to the whole structure of state government, as a democracy would require.  

Step #7 – Suppress Opposition and the Participation of Citizens

What fundamentally differentiates a democracy from an autocracy is that the authorities of the former arrange elections, while the authorities of the latter organize both elections and their results.  Autocracies “deny opposition candidates a fair chance” by capitalizing on legal customs and conventions that ensure their continued rule,  such as “unequal suffrage,”  partisan gerrymandering,  changes in election law,  biased sources of news,  and restrictive campaign policies,  among others. Following the unsuccessful attempt by Trump and his supporters to overturn the 2020 federal election, Republican elected officials began to restrict voting across the country.  According to the Brennan Center for Justice, more than 425 bills have been introduced to do so in 49 states, 33 of which involve curbing mail-in voting, bolster voter ID laws, contracting early voting, and eradicating same-day registration.  In addition, the Cooperative Congressional Election Study demonstrated that more stringent identification laws disproportionately damage the turnout African and Hispanic Americans in general elections, which skews democracy in favor of white Americans on the right wing of the political spectrum.  The proliferation of these laws raises worrisome questions about voter suppression and minorities’ access to political representation. 
Most prominently, in the 2016 North Carolina NAACP v. McCrory case,  the state Supreme Court ruled that the N.C. Session Law 2013-381 House Bill 589 reforming election law  violated the ban against “invidious” discriminatory intent  outlined in section 2 of the 1965 Voting Rights Act  and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,  by de-facto disenfranchising black Americans.  Similarly, just last week, the U.S. Supreme Court heard the oral arguments in the case Moore v. Harper (which rely on the independent state legislature theory).  In Moore, North Carolina’s state legislature sought to overrule the state Supreme Court’s decision that the legislature had violated the state constitution’s prohibition on partisan gerrymandering by redistricting maps in a manner that favored Republican candidates.  The problem is that a state legislature ignoring its own constitution is a function of their blatant disregard for the Rule of Law.  In so doing, the voices of minorities will continue to be underrepresented, and the laws being passed will not reflect the will of all the people in our democracy. 

Step #8 – Neglect your Duty

The Lockean conception of rights and duties is a correlative one.  Each right that a citizen possesses – granted to them by the American Bill of Rights – is correlative with the government’s duty to forebear from interfering with said right, and moreover, upholding any obligations that the duty carries.  Thus, a state legislature failing on its commitment to uphold free and fair elections, provide all citizens with the equal protection of the law, follow the Rule of Law, cooperate with the federalist system of checks and balances, and like duties, is anti-democratic at its very core. As such, the independent state legislature theory necessarily cannot stand as legitimate grounds of a governmental authority in the United States of America.




Case III: How to Preserve a Democracy with the Judiciary

  Today, the United State Supreme Court is widely regarded as the highest authority and final arbiter of constitutional questions.  Prima facie, it symbolizes the democratic principles of separation of powers and checks and balances.  The judicial branch most prominently rests on its function of judicial review, granted to it by Marbury v. Madison, the case in which the Court first nullified a provision in a legislative bill on constitutional grounds.  Judicial review, then, is the ability to interpret the Constitution, and thereby evaluate laws passed by the legislature and executive.  Over the past century, judicial review has formed the basis of the judiciary’s supremacy, wherein their power has expanded to include interpreting the Constitution as a living document. 
  What the Supreme Court looks like today stands in stark contrast to what it was originally conceived as by some of the Founding Fathers.  Thomas Jefferson infamously condemned the Marbury v. Madison ruling as one which “would make the judiciary a despotic branch,”  and that the judiciary should not be the sole interpretive authority of our “constitutional inheritance.”  This departmentalistic view is elusive  insofar as it affords the public the polity of actively and constantly presiding over the “interpretation and enforcement of constitutional law.”  This is because of a common view that legal scholars hold, namely, a consideration of the Constitution as

… America’s civil religion, defining and shaping who we are and what we wish to be. The Constitution is and always has been the repository of American-ness, the forum for our deliberation and discourse about our hopes and aspirations, and the vehicle by which we crystallize our fears and dreams. This view of the role of the Constitution provides fertile ground for skepticism about judicial supremacy. If the Constitution is so central to what we are, is so constitutive of everything that we the people stand for, and is the vehicle for the formation and transformation of national identity, then leaving such a central role in democratic self-governance to judges should be a source of concern. Such an allocation of power would involve an abdication of democratic governance itself. 

However, this perception of democracy complicates matters. As aforementioned, a democracy presumes disagreement; magnifying this disagreement hundreds of thousands of times in the context of sharing the interpretation of the Constitution among the people, would undoubtedly lead to civil unrest at best, and a civil war at worst. To do so would be to put “an inestimable treasure… into the hands of drunkards, madmen, and fools,” and such authority must be withheld “to save the people from their most dangerous enemy, to save them from themselves.”  Further, the Supreme Court has been designed as independent and objective: its sole duty is to the Constitution of the United States, and not any particular policies.  As such, justices would necessarily be fair and impartial.  Moreover, in accordance with Dworkin’s view of jurisprudence, cases are decided based on their facts, the merits of legal arguments presented, relevant precedents, neutral principles of law.  Most importantly, they must be free from external burdens and interests imposed by political parties.  In fact, it is because people hold divergent perspectives about justice that adjudication and legislation in a democracy demand Legal Integrity.  For this reason, a modest understanding of the “raison d’etre” of the Constitution is in order, where 

The Constitution, although it does set out the basic structure of government and delineates the procedural rules by which that government will operate, says remarkably little about what the government should do, and that is as it should be. By and large, such central substantive decisions about public policy should be made in more public, more representative, and more deliberative forums, whether those forums be the chambers of legislatures or the more important and more diffuse networks by which public opinion is formed, reformed, and implemented. For all such tasks, the modest Constitution is appropriately a bystander. To believe in the modest Constitution is not to disagree with the popular constitutionalists about the primary locus for determining major questions of public policy. It is, instead, to disagree with the notion that when these questions are determined by the people the debate is or should be channeled through the Constitution. There are examples in which it is, to be sure, but just as the owner of a hammer needs to be wary of seeing every problem as a nail, so, too, does the constitutionalist-especially the American constitutionalist-need to be wary of seeing every problem as a constitutional one. 

The distinction between principle and policy, then, would require a separation of powers, and entail the judiciary being the sole interpreter of the Constitution; although one that exercises restraint over its own judgement to limit the power to usurp the federal government’s legislative authority.  The Supreme Court, then, is accountable not only to itself, but to the people that constitute a democracy, as well as the other branches of government that can check it through the impeachment of justices.  In effect, it is the appropriate mechanism of upholding the Rule of Law.  With regard to the corruption of any institution of government, Allen writes, “I muck the stalls. I find a diamond. I clean it off and keep it. I do not abandon it because of where I found it. Instead, I own it.”  As such, civil liberties must not be protected with munitions, but with “an unwearying insistence upon the honesty, integrity, and professionalism of American institutions and those who lead them.”  After all, democracy, and by extension, politics and law, rather than something to prima facie be established, is instead a result of institutions: a product of our history that weaves together principles and context to better advance society. 
So, to citizens of the United States of America, vote, for our democracy is at stake. Protest the abuse of power. Embrace the peaceful transfer of power. Hold yourself and your leaders accountable for their words and actions. Believe in truth. Respect checks and balances. Connect with those who hold beliefs different than yours. Always uphold your duties:

Get into the habit of telephoning your senators and House member at their local offices… Press your senators to ensure that prosecutors and judges are chosen for their independence – and that their independence is protected. Support laws to require the Treasury to release presidential tax returns… Express your support and sympathy for journalists attacked by social-media trolls, especially [minorities and] women in journalism, so often the preferred targets. Honor civil servants who are fired or forced to resign because they defied improper orders. Keep close watch for signs of the rise of a culture of official impunity, in which friends and supporters of power-holders are allowed to flout rules that bind everyone else… [because] what happens next is up to you and me. Don’t be afraid. This moment of danger can also be your finest hour as a citizen and an American. 

Bibliography

  Szasz, Thomas. “Thomas Szasz Quote.” Quotes, AZ Quotes, (n.d.), https://www.azquotes.com/quote/1394576. 
  Arendt, Hannah. “On Violence Quotes.” Quotes, Goodreads, (n.d.), https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/437062-on-violence. 
  Emerson, Ralph Waldo. “Ralph Waldo Emerson Quote.” Quotes, AZ Quotes, (n.d.), https://www.azquotes.com/quote/534902. 
  Biden, Joseph. “Remarks by President Biden on Standing up for Democracy.” The White House, The United States Government, 2 Nov. 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/11/03/remarks-by-president-biden-on-standing-up-for-democracy/. 
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Preamble.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.”
  Biden, Joseph. “Remarks by President Biden on Standing up for Democracy.” The White House, The United States Government, 2 Nov. 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/11/03/remarks-by-president-biden-on-standing-up-for-democracy/.
  Adams, John. “From John Adams to John Taylor.” Founder Online, National Archives and Records Administration, 17 Dec. 1814, https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Adams/99-02-02-6371. 
“Remember, democracy never lasts long. It soon wastes, exhausts, and murders itself. There never was a democracy yet that did not commit suicide. It is in vain to say that democracy is less vain, less proud, less selfish, less ambitious, or less avaricious than aristocracy or monarchy. It is not true, in fact, and nowhere appears in history. Those passions are the same in all men, under all forms of simple government, and when unchecked, produce the same effects of fraud, violence, and cruelty.”
  Stokes, Susan. “Explaining Democratic Erosion.” World Politics Series, Kellogg Institute for International Studies, 27 Sept. 2022, https://kellogg.nd.edu/explaining-democratic-erosion. 
  Huq, Aziz Z., and Ginsburg, Tom. “How to Lose a Constitutional Democracy.” U.C.L.A. Law Review, vol. 65, no. 78, 2017, https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=13666&context=journal_articles. pp. 78–169.
  Chappell, Zsuzsanna, and Herzog, Lisa. “How to Kill a Democracy in 10 Easy Steps (Spoiler Alert: Exhaust Your Citizens).” Democracy, Justice Everywhere, 14 Mar. 2022, http://justice-everywhere.org/democracy/how-to-kill-a-democracy-in-10-easy-steps-spoiler-alert-exhaust-your-citizens/. 
  Warnock, Taylor Dybdahl. “Separation of Powers - An Overview.” Separation of Powers, National Conference of State Legislatures, 1 May 2021, https://www.ncsl.org/research/about-state-legislatures/separation-of-powers-an-overview.aspx. 
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 2, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves and Pardons for Offences against the United States, except in Cases of Impeachment.”
  Montesquieu, Baron de. “Chapter 6, Of the Constitution of England.” The Spirit of Laws, Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty with Regard to the Constitution, vol. 2, Cosimo, New York, NY, 1748. pp. 151–162. 
  Ibid.
“When the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty; because apprehensions may arise, lest the same monarch or senate should enact tyrannical laws, to execute them in a tyrannical manner. Again, there is no liberty, if the judiciary power be not separated from the legislative and executive. Were it joined with the legislative, the life and liberty of the subject would be exposed to arbitrary control; for the judge would then be the legislator. Were it joined to the executive power, the judge might behave with violence and oppression. There would be an end to everything, were the same man, or the same body, whether of the nobles or of the people, to exercise those three powers, that of enacting laws, that of executing the public resolutions, and of trying the causes of individuals.”
  Anonymous. “Checks and Balances.” History.com, A&E Television Networks, 17 Nov. 2017, https://www.history.com/topics/us-government/checks-and-balances. 
  Madison, James. “Federalist No. 47: The Particular Structure of the New Government and the Distribution of Power Among Its Different Parts.” The Avalon Project | Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, 1 Feb. 1788, https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed47.asp. 
“The accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive, and judiciary, in the same hands, whether of one, a few, or many, and whether hereditary, self-appointed, or elective, may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny.”
  Madison, James. “Federalist No. 51: The Structure of the Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks  and Balances Between the Different Departments.” The Avalon Project | Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, 8 Feb. 1788, https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed51.asp. 
“Ambition must be made to counteract ambition… double security arises to the rights of the people. The governments will control each other, at the same time that each will be controlled by itself by the use of checks and balances.”
  Ibid.
“… giving to those who administer each department the necessary constitutional means and personal motives to resist encroachments of the others.”
  Ibid.
“A dependence on the people is, no doubt, the primary control on the government; but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions… these inventions of prudence cannot be less requisite in the distribution of the supreme powers of the State.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article VI, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any state to the Contrary notwithstanding.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article III, Section 1, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 1, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 4, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 7, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his Objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House, it shall become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 2, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.”
  Smaw, Eric D. “The Great Debate Introduction.” Tiedtke Concert Hall, Rollins College, 5 Oct. 2022.
  Ibid.
  Gopal, Srik. “Understanding Trust to Strengthen Democracy.” Blog, Democracy Fund, 21 Aug. 2017, https://democracyfund.org/idea/understanding-trust-to-strengthen-democracy/. 
  Anonymous. “Trust in Government.” Public Governance, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), 2021, https://www.oecd.org/governance/trust-in-government/.
  Cerar, Miro. “The Relationship Between Law and Politics.” Annual Survey of International & Comparative Law, vol. 15, no. 1, 2009, https://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1126&context=annlsurvey. p. 21.
  Lee Drutman, Lee, et al. “Democracy Maybe: Attitudes on Authoritarianism in America.” Voter Study Group, Democracy Fund, June 2020, https://www.voterstudygroup.org/publication/democracy-maybe#a-majority-of-americans-are-open-to-common-reasons-that-an-authoritarian-leader-would-use-to-ignore-checks-on-their-authority. 
“Far more Americans say that the president must always obey laws and the courts, even if he thinks they are wrong (87 percent) than say that the president should not be bound by these institutions (13 percent). There are far more who are supportive of the news media scrutinizing the president and other politicians to ensure they are accountable to the American public (77 percent) than there are those who say that these leaders should be able to make decisions without being constantly monitored (23 percent). There are far more Americans supportive of Congress providing oversight of the president and executive branch (77 percent) than those who say that Congress should give the president freedom to make decisions that he feels are right for the country. An overwhelming majority agree that citizens should always be free to publicly criticize the president, even when the country is at war (77 percent).”
  Anonymous. “Rule of Law.” Division for Public Education, American Bar Association, (n.d.), https://www.americanbar.org/groups/public_education/resources/rule-of-law/. 
  Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter V, Law as the Union of Primary and Secondary Rules.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. p. 94. 
  Ibid. p. 100.
  Green, Leslie, et al. “Introduction.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. p. xxi.
  Constitution of the United States of America, “Article VII.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992. 
  Gallagher, Sandy. “Accountability.” Proctor Gallagher Institute, 13 Mar. 2017. https://www.proctorgallagherinstitute.com/17557/accountability.
  Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. p. 317.
  Hobbes, Thomas, and Lamprecht, Sterling P. “Chapter VI, On the Right of the Assembly or Man, Who Holds Sovereign Authority in the Commonwealth.” De Cive: On the Citizen, edited by Richard Tuck, translated by Michael Silverthorne, Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, NY, 1949, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. http://www.public-library.uk/ebooks/27/57.pdf. p. 34.
“…for if his power were limited, that limitation must necessarily proceed from some greater power; For he that prescribes limits, must have a greater power than he who is confin’d by them; now that confining power is either without limit, or is again restrained by some other greater than it selfe, and so we shall at length arrive to a power which hath no other limit, but that which is the terminus ultimus of the forces of all the Citizens together. That same is called the supreme command, and if it bee committed to a councell, a supreme councell, but if to one man, the supreme Lord of the City.”
  Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XIII: Of the Natural Condition of Mankind, The Incommodities of Such a War.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968. p. 51. 
  Ibid.
  Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. p. 334.
  Ibid.
  Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XX: Of Dominion Paternall and Despoticall.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968. p. 86. 
  Dworkin, Gerald. “Paternalism.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 9 Sept. 2020, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paternalism/. 
  Lloyd, Sharon A., and Sreedhar, Susanne. “Hobbes’s Moral and Political Philosophy.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 12 Sept. 2022, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hobbes-moral/. 
  Platin, Jacob. “An Examination of Josip Broz Tito and Yugoslavia as an Application of Hobbesian Statecraft and Philosophy.” University of Pennsylvania, GitHub, (n.d.), https://jrplatin.github.io/files/hobbes.pdf. 
  Hobbes, Thomas. “Chapter XXVI: Of Civill Lawes, Civill Law What.” Leviathan, Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK, 1968. p. 115. 
“… it manifest, that Law in generall, is not Counsell, but Command; nor a Command of any man to any man; but only of him, whose Command is addressed to one formerly obliged to obey him. And as for Civill Law, it addeth only the name of the person Commanding, which is Persona Civitatis, the Person of the Common-wealth.”
  Austin, J. L. “The Province of Jurisprudence Determined.” Koeblergerhard, 1832, http://www.koeblergerhard.de/Fontes/AustinJohnTheprovinceofjurisprudencedetermined1832.pdf. 
  Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter II, Laws, Commands, and Orders.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. pp. 20-25.
  Enoch, David. “II – What’s Wrong with Paternalism: Autonomy, Belief, and Action.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Volume 116, Issue 1, Oxford University Press, 26 May 2016, https://academic.oup.com/aristotelian/article/116/1/21/2563116. 
  Smaw, Eric D. “Swaying in the Balance: Civil Liberties, National Security, and Justice in Times of Emergency.” ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy, vol. 97, no. 1, 2011, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23680996. pp. 1–2.
  Locke, John. “Chapter XIV, Of Prerogative.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. p. 84.
  Ibid.
  Smaw, Eric D. “Swaying in the Balance: Civil Liberties, National Security, and Justice in Times of Emergency.” ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy, vol. 97, no. 1, 2011, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23680996. pp. 7-8.
  Greene, Abner S. “Checks and Balances in an Era of Presidential Lawmaking.” The University of Chicago Law Review, vol. 61, no. 1, 1994, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1600091. p. 123.
  Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter Seven, Integrity in Law.” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. p. 225.
  Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 325: Philosophy of Law.” Knowles Memorial Chapel, Room 1, Rollins College, 19 Sept. 2022.
  Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter Seven, Integrity in Law.” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. p. 225.
  Smaw, Eric D. “Swaying in the Balance: Civil Liberties, National Security, and Justice in Times of Emergency.” ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy, vol. 97, no. 1, 2011, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23680996. pp. 1-2.
  Locke, John. “Chapter II, Of the State of Nature.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. pp. 8-9.
“4. TO understand political power right, and derive it from its original, we must consider, what state all men are naturally in, and that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature, without asking leave, or depending upon the will of any other man.
A state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another; there being nothing more evident, than that creatures of the same species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without subordination or subjection, unless the lord and master of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty…
6. But though this be a state of liberty, yet it is not a state of licence: though man in that state have an uncontroulable liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has not liberty to destroy himself, or so much as any creature in his possession, but where some nobler use than its bare preservation calls for it. The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law, teaches all mankind, who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions: for men being all the workmanship of one omnipotent, and infinitely wise maker; all the servants of one sovereign master, sent into the world by his order, and about his business; they are his property, whose workmanship they are, made to last during his, not one another’s pleasure: and being furnished with like faculties, sharing all in one community of nature, there cannot be supposed any such subordination among us, that may authorize us to destroy one another, as if we were made for one another’s uses, as the inferior ranks of creatures are for our’s. Every one, as he is bound to preserve himself, and not to quit his station wilfully, so by the like reason, when his own preservation comes not in competition, ought he, as much as he can, to preserve the rest of mankind, and may not, unless it be to do justice on an offender, take away, or impair the life, or what tends to the preservation of the life, the liberty, health, limb, or goods of another.”
  Cerar, Miro. “The Relationship Between Law and Politics.” Annual Survey of International & Comparative Law, vol. 15, no. 1, 2009, https://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1126&context=annlsurvey. p. 19. 
  Levitsky, Steven, and Ziblatt, Daniel. “5: The Guardrails of Democracy.” How Democracies Die, Broadway Books, New York, NY, 2019. p. 106. 
  Locke, John. “Chapter XVIII, Of Tyranny.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. p. 103.
  Mukherjee, Saikat. “The Command of the Sovereign: Relevance of Austin's Theory of Law in the Indian Legal System.” Austin’s Idea of Jurisprudence, Legal Service India E-Journal for Law, Lawyers and Legal Resources, (n.d.), https://www.legalserviceindia.com/legal/article-7800-the-command-of-the-sovereign-relevance-of-austin-s-theory-of-law-in-the-indian-legal-system.html. 
  Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. p. 322.
  Ibid., p. 321.
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb. 
  Anonymous. “Transition of Power: From One Presidential Administration to the Next.” Basics, Center Forward, (n.d.), https://center-forward.org/basics/transition-power-one-presidential-administration-next/. 
  Cerar, Miro. “The Relationship Between Law and Politics.” Annual Survey of International & Comparative Law, vol. 15, no. 1, 2009, https://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1126&context=annlsurvey. p. 21.
  Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter V, Law as the Union of Primary and Secondary Rules.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. pp. 91-99.
  Ibid., p. 94.  
  Ibid., p. 97.
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.
  Ibid.
“A constitutional regime is founded upon the shared belief that the most fundamental commitment of the political system is to the rules. The rules matter more than the outcomes. It’s because the rules matter most that Hillary Clinton conceded the presidency to Trump despite winning millions more votes. It’s because the rules matter most that the giant state of California will accept the supremacy of a federal government that its people rejected by an almost two-to-one margin.”
  Cube, Ice. “You Win Some, You Lose Some. But You Live, You Live to Fight Another Day.” Twitter, 7 Nov. 2014, https://twitter.com/icecube/status/530819499344535552?lang=en. 
  Anonymous. “The January 6 Attack on the U.S. Capitol.” Domestic Terrorism and White Nationalism, American Oversight, 2 May 2022, https://www.americanoversight.org/investigation/the-january-6-attack-on-the-u-s-capitol. 
  Snyder, Timothy. “17. Listen for Dangerous Words.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017. p. 99.
  Snyder, Timothy. “6. Be Aware of Paramilitaries.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017. p. 42.
  Snyder, Timothy. “17. Listen for Dangerous Words.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017. p. 99.
  Weiner, Rachel. “Trump Told Crowd To ‘Fight Like Hell’ Before Riot. Can He Be Sued?” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/12/07/trump-jan6-riot-lawsuit/. 
  Anonymous. “Florida Man Found Guilty of Felony and Misdemeanor Charges Related to Capitol Breach.” U.S. Attorney’s Office | District of Columbia, The United States Department of Justice, 9 Dec. 2022, https://www.justice.gov/usao-dc/pr/florida-man-found-guilty-felony-and-misdemeanor-charges-related-capitol-breach-0. 
  Collinson, Stephen. “Scenes of Sickening Violence at the Capitol Open January 6 Committee’s Case Against Trump and His Insurrectionist Conspiracy.” Politics, Cable News Network CNN, 10 June 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/10/politics/january-6-hearing-donald-trump/index.html. 
  Anonymous. “Indiana Man Pleads Guilty to Carrying a Gun and Assaulting Law Enforcement Officers in Jan. 6 Capitol Breach.” U.S. Attorney’s Office | District of Columbia, The United States Department of Justice, 17 June 2022, https://www.justice.gov/usao-dc/pr/indiana-man-pleads-guilty-carrying-gun-and-assaulting-law-enforcement-officers-jan-6. 
  Walsh, Deirdre. “Capitol Police Chief: Jan. 6 Failures ‘Largely’ Fixed but Extremism Threat Persists.” WUSF Public Media, National Public Radio NPR, 6 Dec. 2022, https://wusfnews.wusf.usf.edu/2022-12-06/capitol-police-chief-jan-6-failures-largely-fixed-but-extremism-threat-persists. 
  Kellerman, Ben. “The Photo That Helped Define the Jan. 6 Attack on the U.S. Capitol: A Visual Backstory.” Behind the Lens: January 6, Reuters, 30 Dec. 2021, https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-capitol-security-backstory/. 
  Anonymous. “Transition of Power: From One Presidential Administration to the Next.” Basics, Center Forward, (n.d.), https://center-forward.org/basics/transition-power-one-presidential-administration-next/.
  Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 325: Philosophy of Law.” Knowles Memorial Chapel, Room 1, Rollins College, 28 Nov. 2022.
  Hsu, Spencer S. “Justice Dept. Calls Jan. 6 ‘Capitol Attack’ Probe One of Largest in U.S. History, Expects At Least 400 To Be Charge.” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 13 Mar. 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/legal-issues/capitol-attack-investigation-largest/2021/03/12/5c07b46c-833d-11eb-9ca6-54e187ee4939_story.html. 
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 9, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 1, Clause 8.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath or Affirmation:– I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.”
  Alemany, Jacqueline, et al. “Talk of Martial Law, Insurrection Act Draws Notice of Jan. 6 Committee.” Politics, The Washington Post, 27 Apr. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/04/27/talk-martial-law-insurrection-act-draws-notice-jan-6-committee/. 
  Anonymous. “18 USC § 2384: Seditious Conspiracy.” U.S. Law Code, House of Representatives, (n.d.), https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid%3AUSC-1999-title18-section2384&num=0&edition=1999. 
“If two or more persons in any State or Territory, or in any place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, conspire to overthrow, put down, or to destroy by force the Government of the United States, or to levy war against them, or to oppose by force the authority thereof, or by force to prevent, hinder, or delay the execution of any law of the United States, or by force to seize, take, or possess any property of the United States contrary to the authority thereof, they shall each be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years, or both.”
  Richer, Alanna Durkin. “Explainer: Rare Sedition Charge at Center of Jan. 6 Trial.” AP News, Associated Press, 28 Sept. 2022, https://apnews.com/article/what-does-sedition-charge-mean-3aa820dda5f501dd874c4dd6d60ca1ce. 
  Anonymous. “Electoral Count Act of 1887.” Forty-Ninth Congress Session II, GovTrack.us, 3 Feb. 1887, https://govtrackus.s3.amazonaws.com/legislink/pdf/stat/24/STATUTE-24-Pg373.pdf. 
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 12.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The Electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate;-The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;-The person having the greatest Number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President-The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.”
  Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter IV, Sovereign and Subject.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. p. 51.
“Here, we shall inquire whether such a habit is sufficient to account for two salient features of most legal systems: the continuity of the authority to make law possessed by a succession of different legislators…”
  Hart, H. L. A., et al. “Chapter IV, Sovereign and Subject.” The Concept of Law, edited by Paul Craig, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, Clarendon Law Series. pp. 51-61.
  Ibid., pp. 51-60. 
  Ibid.
  Ibid., pp. 61-66. 
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.
  Ibid.
  Ibid.
  Snyder, Timothy. “3. Beware the One-Party State.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017. p. 26. 
“Beware the one-party state… The parties that remade states and suppressed rivals were not omnipotent from the start. They exploited a historic moment to make political life impossible for their opponents. So support the multi-party system and defend the rules of democratic elections.”
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.
  Fandos, Nicholas. “Trump Impeached for Inciting Insurrection.” Politics, The New York Times, 22 Apr. 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/13/us/politics/trump-impeached.html. 
  Mayer, Jane. “Can Cyrus Vance, Jr., Nail Trump?” A Reporter at Large, The New Yorker, 12 Mar. 2021, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/03/22/can-cyrus-vance-jr-nail-trump. 
  Jansen, Bart, and Johnson, Kevin. “DOJ Mapped Out Strong Obstruction Evidence Against Trump, Aides in Filing, Experts Say.” USA Today Politics, Gannett Satellite Information Network, 31 Aug. 2022, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2022/08/31/justice-department-trump-obstruction-mar-a-lago/7949164001/?gnt-cfr=1. 
  Weiner, Rachel. “GOP Operative Found Guilty of Funneling Russian Money to Donald Trump.” Legal Issues, The Washington Post, 17 Nov. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/11/17/benton-trump-russian-vasilenko-guilty/. 
  Eisen, Norman, and Reisner, Katherine. “Whatever Legal or Constitutional Test You Apply, Trump Incited the Violent Capitol Attack.” USA Today, Gannett Satellite Information Network, 3 Feb. 2021, https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2021/02/03/donald-trump-incited-capitol-attack-by-any-legal-test-column/4370622001/. 
  Scannell, Kara, and Valle, Lauren del. “Trump Organization Found Guilty On All Counts of Criminal Tax Fraud.” Politics, Cable News Network CNN, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/12/06/politics/trump-organization-fraud-trial-verdict/index.html. 
  Alschuler, Albert W. “Seditious Conspiracy vs. Insurrection: Assessing the Evidence against Trump.” House Select Committee on January 6, Just Security, 19 Aug. 2022, https://www.justsecurity.org/82713/seditious-conspiracy-vs-insurrection-assessing-the-evidence-against-trump/. 
  Eisen, Norman, et al. “Fulton County, Georgia’s Trump Investigation.” Report, The Brookings Institute, 14 Nov. 2022, https://www.brookings.edu/research/second-edition-fulton-county-georgias-trump-investigation/. 
  Balz, Dan. “A Year After Jan. 6, Are the Guardrails That Protect Democracy Real or Illusory?” Analysis, The Washington Post, 6 Jan. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/democracy-january-6/2022/01/06/2a1fc41e-6db4-11ec-a5d2-7712163262f0_story.html. 
  Whelan, Frederick G. “Language and Its Abuses in Hobbes’ Political Philosophy.” The American Political Science Review, vol. 75, no. 1, 1981, JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/1962159. pp. 59–75. 
  Hobbes, Thomas, and Lamprecht, Sterling P. “Chapter V, Of the Causes, and First Beginning of Civil Government.” De Cive: On the Citizen, edited by Richard Tuck, translated by Michael Silverthorne, Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, NY, 1949, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. http://www.public-library.uk/ebooks/27/57.pdf. p. 29.
  McKay, Ivy. “Donald Trump and Doublespeak: An Unsettling Precursor to the Dystopian Society of George Orwell’s 1984.” The Pegasus Review: University of Central Florida Undergraduate Research Journal, vol. 10, no. 1, 15 Oct. 2018, https://stars.library.ucf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1091&context=urj. pp. 22–28. 
  Ibid., p. 23.
  Ibid.
  Plato. “Gorgias.” Translated by Benjamin Jowett, Plato’s Gorgias, Ancient Texts, 380 B.C., http://www.ancienttexts.org/library/greek/plato/gorgias.html. 
  Jacoby, Susan. “One, The Way We Live Now: Just Us Folks.” The Age of American Unreason in a Culture of Lies, 2nd ed., Vintage Books, A Division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2018. pp. 3–32. 
  Keane, Erin. “From Truthiness to Post-Truth, Just in Time for Donald Trump: Oxford Dictionaries’ Word of the Year Should Scare the Hell Out of You.” Salon, 19 Nov. 2016. https://www.salon.com/2016/11/19/from-truthiness-to-post-truth-just-in-time-for-donald-trump-oxford-dictionaries-word-of-the-year-should-scare-the-hell-out-of-you/. 
  Locke, John. “Chapter II, Of the State of Nature.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. p. 13.
“14. It is often asked as a mighty objection, where are, or ever were there any men in such a state of nature? To which it may suffice as an answer at present, that since all princes and rulers of independent governments all through the world, are in a state of nature, it is plain the world never was, nor ever will be, without numbers of men in that state. I have named all governors of independent communities, whether they are, or are not, in league with others: for it is not every compact that puts an end to the state of nature between men, but only this one of agreeing together mutually to enter into one community, and make one body politic; other promises, and compacts, men may make one with another, and yet still be in the state of nature. The promises and bargains for truck, &c. between the two men in the desert island, mentioned by Garcilasso de la Vega, in his history of Peru; or between a Swiss and an Indian, in the woods of America, are binding to them, though they are perfectly in a state of nature, in reference to one another: for truth and keeping of faith belongs to men, as men, and not as members of society.”
  Kendall-Taylor, Andrea, and Frantz, Erica. “How Democracies Fall Apart.” Why Populism Is a Pathway to Autocracy, Foreign Affairs, 5 Dec. 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2016-12-05/how-democracies-fall-apart. 
  Freeman, Joanne B. “Jan. 6 Crossed a Line. We Need to Say So Before It’s Too Late for Democracy.” Outlook, The Washington Post, 10 Dec. 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2021/12/10/january-6-congress-line/. 
  Grand, Julian Le, and New, Bill. “Chapter 8, Paternalism and Policy.” Government Paternalism: Nanny State or Helpful Friend?, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2020. p. 147.
  Waldman, Michael. “Focus On the Big Lie, Not The Big Liar.” Analysis, Brennan Center for Justice, 14 June 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/focus-big-lie-not-big-liar. 
  Gessen, Masha. “The Putin Paradigm: To What Extent Can Putin Provide Insight into Trump’s Understanding of Power?” Politics, The New York Review of Books, 13 Dec. 2016, https://www.nybooks.com/online/2016/12/13/putin-paradigm-how-trump-will-rule/. 
  Clark, Doug Bock, et al. “Building the ‘Big Lie:’ Inside the Creation of Trump’s Stolen Election Myth.” Politics, ProPublica, 26 Apr. 2022, https://www.propublica.org/article/big-lie-trump-stolen-election-inside-creation. 
  Parker, Ashley. “Jan. 6 Hearing Shows Trump Knew He Lost - Even While Claiming Otherwise.” Analysis, The Washington Post, 14 Oct. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/10/14/trump-knew-he-lost-jan-6/. 
  Trump, Donald. “Trump’s Full Speech at D.C. Rally on Jan. 6.” The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones & Company, 7 Feb. 2021, https://www.wsj.com/video/trump-full-speech-at-dc-rally-on-jan-6/E4E7BBBF-23B1-4401-ADCE-7D4432D07030.html. 
  Dawes, Nic. “Maneuvering a New Reality for U.S. Journalism.” Politics, Columbia Journalism Review, 22 Nov. 2016, https://www.cjr.org/the_feature/trump_journalism_press_freedom_global.php. 
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.
  Snyder, Timothy. “10. Believe in Truth.” On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, 1st ed., Tim Duggan Books, Crown Publishing Group, Penguin Random House LLC, New York, NY, 2017. pp. 65-71.
  Moore, Timothy K. “Brief of Petitioners.” Moore v. Harper (No. 21-1271), Supreme Court of the United States, 29 Aug. 2022, https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/21/21-1271/236562/20220829124545799_21-1271%20Brief%20for%20Petitioners.pdf. 
  Amar, Vikram David. “How ISL Theory Has Already (and Recently) Been Repudiated by the U.S. Supreme Court: Part Two in a Series.” Legal Analysis and Commentary from Justia, Verdict Comments, 2 Mar. 2022, https://verdict.justia.com/2022/03/02/how-isl-theory-has-already-and-recently-been-repudiated-by-the-u-s-supreme-court-part-two-in-a-series. 
  Ibid.
  Cerar, Miro. “The Relationship Between Law and Politics.” Annual Survey of International & Comparative Law, vol. 15, no. 1, 2009, https://digitalcommons.law.ggu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1126&context=annlsurvey. p. 19.
  Ibid.
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 4, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Senators.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article II, Section 1, Clause 2.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by Ballot for two Persons, of whom one at least shall not be an Inhabitant of the same State with themselves.”
  Locke, John. “Chapter XIII, Of Subordination of the Powers.” The Second Treatise of Government, Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, IN, 1980. p. 78.
“In all cases, whilst the government subsists, the legislative is the supreme power: for what can give laws to another, must needs be superior to him; and since the legislative is no otherwise legislative of the society, but by the right it has to make laws for all the parts, and for every member of the society, prescribing rules to their actions, and giving power of execution, where they are transgressed, the legislative must needs be the supreme, and all other powers, in any members or parts of the society, derived from and subordinate to it.”
  Allan, T. R. S. “Legislative Supremacy and Legislative Intention: Interpretation, Meaning, and Authority.” The Cambridge Law Journal, vol. 63, no. 3, 2004, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/4509144. p. 687.
  Ibid.
  Morley, Michael T. “The Independent State Legislature Doctrine.” Fordham Law Review, vol. 90, no. 2, 2021, https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5885&context=flr. pp. 501–560.
  Ibid., pp. 509-515.
  Ibid., pp. 515-532.
  Ibid., pp. 536-542.
  Ibid., p. 512.
  Best, Judith A. “Legislative Tyranny and the Liberation of the Executive: A View from the Founding.” Presidential Studies Quarterly, vol. 17, no. 4, 1987, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/27550479. pp. 697–709.
  Wilson, James. “Madison Debates.” The Avalon Project | Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, 15 Aug. 1787, https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/debates_815.asp. 
  Best, Judith A. “Legislative Tyranny and the Liberation of the Executive: A View from the Founding.” Presidential Studies Quarterly, vol. 17, no. 4, 1987, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/27550479. p. 699.
  Ibid., p. 700.
  Ibid.
  Tocqueville, Alexis de. “Chapter VI: Judicial Power in The United States, Judicial Power in The United States and Its Influence on Political Society.” Democracy in America, New American Library, New York, NY, 1831. https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/de-tocqueville/democracy-america/ch06.htm. 
  Amar, Vikram David. “The North Carolina Partisan Gerrymander Case and the Historical ‘Independent State Legislature’ (ISL) Theory: Part One in a Series.” Legal Analysis and Commentary from Justia, Verdict Comments, 1 Mar. 2022, https://verdict.justia.com/2022/03/01/the-north-carolina-partisan-gerrymander-case-and-the-ahistorical-independent-state-legislature-isl-theory-part-one-in-a-series. 
  Totenberg, Nina. “Supreme Court to Hear Controversial Election-Law Case.” Law, National Public Radio NPR, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.npr.org/2022/12/07/1140465909/supreme-court-independent-state-legislature-theory. 
  Amar, Vikram David. “The North Carolina Partisan Gerrymander Case and the Historical ‘Independent State Legislature’ (ISL) Theory: Part One in a Series.” Legal Analysis and Commentary from Justia, Verdict Comments, 1 Mar. 2022, https://verdict.justia.com/2022/03/01/the-north-carolina-partisan-gerrymander-case-and-the-ahistorical-independent-state-legislature-isl-theory-part-one-in-a-series.
  Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. p. 327.
  Ibid., p. 326.
  Ibid.
  Tausanovitch, Alex, and Root, Danielle. “How Partisan Gerrymandering Limits Voting Rights.” Restoring Social Trust in Democracy, Center for American Progress, 8 July 2020, https://www.americanprogress.org/article/partisan-gerrymandering-limits-voting-rights/. 
  Kamarck, Elaine. “Voter Suppression or Voter Expansion? What’s Happening and Does It Matter?” The Strengthening American Democracy Initiative, The Brookings Institute, 26 Oct. 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2021/10/26/voter-suppression-or-voter-expansion-whats-happening-and-does-it-matter/. 
  Marston, Celeste Katz. “The Media and the Ballot Box: Confronting 21st Century Voter Suppression.” Features, Nieman Reports, 15 Dec. 2021, https://niemanreports.org/articles/the-media-and-the-ballot-box-confronting-21st-century-voter-suppression/. 
  Tóth, Gábor Attila. “Breaking the Equilibrium: From Distrust of Representative Government to an Authoritarian Executive.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 28, no. 2, 1 Apr. 2019, https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1804&context=wilj. p. 327.
  Bursztynsky, Jessica. “Pelosi Says GOP Efforts to Restrict Voting Laws Is a ‘Legislative Continuation’ of Jan. 6.” Politics, CNBC, 9 Jan. 2022, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/01/09/pelosi-says-gop-efforts-to-restrict-voting-laws-is-a-legislative-continuation-of-jan-6.html. 
  Sweren-Becker, Eliza, et al. “Voting Laws Roundup: July 2021.” Resource, Brennan Center for Justice, 22 July 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/voting-laws-roundup-july-2021. 
  Hajnal, Zoltan, et al. “Voter Identification Laws and the Suppression of Minority Votes.” The Journal of Politics, vol. 79, no. 2, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1086/688343. pp. 363–379.
  Anonymous. “North Carolina NAACP V. McCrory.” Court Case Tracker, Brennan Center for Justice, 15 May 2017, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/court-cases/north-carolina-naacp-v-mccrory. 
  Anonymous. “House Bill 589.” Session Law 2013-381, General Assembly of North Carolina, 2013, https://www.ncleg.net/Sessions/2013/Bills/House/PDF/H589v9.pdf. 
  Anonymous. “North Carolina NAACP v. McCrory.” Brennan Center for Justice, Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals, 6 Dec. 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legal-work/Opinion_7_29_16.pdf. 
  Anonymous. “Voting Rights Act.” Public Law 89-110, U.S. Government Archives, 6 Aug. 1965, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-79/pdf/STATUTE-79-Pg437.pdf. 
“No voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard, practice, or procedure shall be imposed or applied by any State or political subdivision to deny or abridge the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or color.”
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Amendment 14.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside. No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
  Anonymous. “North Carolina NAACP V. McCrory.” Court Case Tracker, Brennan Center for Justice, 15 May 2017, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/court-cases/north-carolina-naacp-v-mccrory. 
  PBSNewsHour. “Listen Live: Supreme Court Hears Case That Could Give State Legislatures More Power Over Elections.” YouTube, 7 Dec. 2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTbSGsnXXIc&t=5s.
  Sweren-Becker, Eliza, and Herenstein, Ethan. “Moore v. Harper, Explained.” Explainer, Brennan Center for Justice, 26 Oct. 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/moore-v-harper-explained. 
  Allan, T. R. S. “Legislative Supremacy and Legislative Intention: Interpretation, Meaning, and Authority.” The Cambridge Law Journal, vol. 63, no. 3, 2004, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/4509144. p. 696.
  Smaw, Eric D. “Swaying in the Balance: Civil Liberties, National Security, and Justice in Times of Emergency.” ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy, vol. 97, no. 1, 2011, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23680996. p. 5.
“This can be seen in Locke’s discussions of rights and duties in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding and the Essays on the Law of Nature.  For example, in the Essays on the Law of Nature, Locke argues that in “order to understand from whence [a] bond of law takes its origin, we must understand that no one can oblige or bind us to do anything unless he has a right… over us.” Similarly, in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, he tells us that “a general is one that hath power to command an army and an army under a general is a collection of armed men obliged to obey.” Most notably, however, in the same work, he argues that words such as power/obligation, right/duty, and so on, “are all reciprocal… and contain in them a reference of two things, one to the other.” “Yet,” he continues: “because one of the two things often wants a relative name, importing that reference men usually take no notice of it, and the relation is commonly overlooked.” Therefore, although Locke does not explicitly say that rights and duties are correlatives his discussions of rights and duties clearly indicate that he holds such a position. And, as we shall see shortly, liberal democracies adopted Locke’s convention of making rights correlative with duties.”
  Ibid.
  Anonymous. “The Court and Constitutional Interpretation.” About the Court, Supreme Court of the United States, (n.d.), https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/constitutional.aspx. 
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article III, Section 1, Clause 1.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
  Anonymous. “Marbury v. Madison.” U.S. Supreme Court, Library of Congress, Feb. 1803, https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep005/usrep005137/usrep005137.pdf. 
  Anonymous. “Judicial Review.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, (n.d.), https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/judicial_review. 
  Clinton, Robert Lowry. “Judicial Supremacy and Our Two Constitutions: Reflections on the Historical Record.” Courts Report, The Heritage Foundation, 19 June 2020. https://www.heritage.org/courts/report/judicial-supremacy-and-our-two-constitutions-reflections-the-historical-record. 
  Ibid.
  Jefferson, Thomas. “From Thomas Jefferson to Abigail Smith Adams.” Founders Online, National Archives and Records Administration, 11 Sept. 1804, https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Adams/99-03-02-1317. 
  Whittington, Keith E. “Political Foundations of Judicial Supremacy: The Presidency, the Supreme Court, and Constitutional Leadership in U.S. History.” Princeton University Press, 2007. 
  Fallon, Richard H. “Judicial Supremacy, Departmentalism, and the Rule of Law in a Populist Age.” Texas Law Review, vol. 96, no. 3, Feb. 2018, https://texaslawreview.org/judicial-supremacy-departmentalism-rule-law-populist-age/. pp. 487–553.
  Kramer, Larry D. “Popular Constitutionalism, circa 2004.” California Law Review, vol. 92, no. 4, 2004, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/3481314. p. 959.
  Schauer, Frederick. “Judicial Supremacy and the Modest Constitution.” California Law Review, vol. 92, no. 4, 2004, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/3481317. pp. 1064–1065. 
  Kramer, Larry D. “Judicial Supremacy and the End of Judicial Restraint.” California Law Review, vol. 100, no. 3, 2012, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23249568. p. 626.
  Anonymous. “An Independent Judiciary.” Principles of Democracy, (n.d.), https://www.principlesofdemocracy.org/judiciary. 
  Ibid.
  Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter One, What is Law?” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. pp. 6-11. 
  Anonymous. “An Independent Judiciary.” Principles of Democracy, (n.d.), https://www.principlesofdemocracy.org/judiciary.
  Marmor, Andrei. “Integrity in Law’s Empire.” Cornell Legal Studies Research Paper No. 19-28, Social Science Research Network, 18 July 2019. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3422173. 
  Schauer, Frederick. “Judicial Supremacy and the Modest Constitution.” California Law Review, vol. 92, no. 4, 2004, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/3481317. p. 1065.
  Allan, T. R. S. “Dworkin and Dicey: The Rule of Law as Integrity.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 8, no. 2, 1988, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/764314. pp. 266–277.
  Constitution of the United States of America. “Article I, Section 3, Clause 6.” The Constitute Project, 1992. https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/United_States_of_America_1992.
“The Senate shall have the sole Power to try all Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present.”
  Allan, T. R. S. “Dworkin and Dicey: The Rule of Law as Integrity.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 8, no. 2, 1988, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/764314. pp. 266–277.
  Allen, Danielle. “The Flawed Genius of the Constitution.” The Atlantic, Atlantic Media Company, 5 Oct. 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/10/danielle-allen-constitution/615481/. 
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.
  Dworkin, Ronald. “Chapter One, What is Law?” Law’s Empire, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986, pp. 6-11. 
  Frum, David. “How to Build an Autocracy.” Politics, The Atlantic, Mar. 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/03/how-to-build-an-autocracy/513872/?utm_source=fbb.