Rollins College

The Final Frontier:
Unraveling the Neuroscientific and Philosophical Mystery of ‘Consciousness’

Jiya Manchanda
PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, Madmen
Dr. Eric Smaw
May 7, 2023

How can a three-pound mass of jelly that you can hold in your palm imagine angels, contemplate the meaning of infinity, and even question its own place in the cosmos? Especially awe inspiring is the fact that any single brain, including yours, is made up of atoms that were forged in the hearts of countless, far-flung stars billions of years ago. These particles drifted for eons and light-years until gravity and change brought them together here, now. These atoms now form a conglomerate – your brain – that can not only ponder the very stars that gave it birth but can also think about its own ability to think and wonder about its own ability to wonder. With the arrival of humans, it has been said, the universe has suddenly become conscious of itself. This, truly, is the greatest mystery of all. 

The enigma of consciousness and autonomy has captivated the world for centuries, and as we advance in technological research, the mystery simultaneously deepens and unravels.  At the heart of this enigma lies the question of human control over our thoughts, actions, and decisions.  Yet, we have come to recognize our sense of self as an illusion, a construct of our own creation that helps us comprehend the world around us.  It is this very illusion of self that underscores the importance of examining the anomalies of the mind, as they can serve as a point of comparison in guiding our interpretation of not only normal cognitive functioning, but also the ways in which neuroplasticity changes us over time.  As such, philosophy, linguistics, neuroscience, evolutionary biology, and cognitive anthropology have helped us identify what makes us uniquely human.  In what follows, I will offer various philosophical, neuroscientific, and pragmatic analyses of our cognitive functions to illustrate a conception of consciousness. Ultimately wielding an interdisciplinary approach, I argue that by investigating the ways in which humans make decisions, we can establish a justification for the notion that humans are both autonomous and heteronomous, and subsequently hold people responsible for their actions accordingly.
In his groundbreaking book, Phantoms in the Brain, V. S. Ramachandran presents the novel and insightful Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness, which entails “the three laws of qualia,”  i.e., subjective, first-person conscious experiences of “ness,” be it wetness, redness, cleanliness, or forgiveness.  According to him, our brains “take advantage of the fact that the world we live in is not chaotic and amorphous.”  Rather, it has steady material qualities, and it is with evolution and learning that these became embedded into the sensory areas of our brain as “assumptions or hidden knowledge about the world.”  This knowledge eliminates any ambiguity in understanding our environment and ourselves, rendering the irrevocability of qualia a functional and computational advantage.  As such, stability of perception forms the first criteria of qualia. 
The stability of perception is primarily rooted in our temporal lobe and the limbic structures that are affiliated with it, which act as the interface between perception and action.  The temporal lobe interprets the meaning of visual and auditory stimuli, including recognizing objects and responding to one’s environment.  The limbic system, on the other hand, establishes emotional states, and links the controlled functions of the cerebral cortex with the autonomic functions of the brain stem.  These two structures work in conjunction to create our qualia-laden perceptions.  So, whenever we view an object, a unique pattern of nerve activity is generated in a subset of these areas.  This pattern of activity serves as a symbolic representation of the object we are viewing;  in which case, perception is not merely a process of replicating an image in our brain.  We know this to be the case because even in the case that the image on our retina remains constant, our interpretation of it can change dramatically.  For example, at first glance of Figure 12.2, one might see a “jumble of splotches.”  However, upon the occurrence of top-down information processing, a Dalmatian appears: “the next time you see it, there’s no way you can avoid seeing the dog.”  As such, the neurons in one’s brain would have permanently been altered.  As such, the perception would have become “irrevocable” and “tamper-resistant” by higher brain centers.  For this reason, consciousness entails an elimination of hesitation and confers certainty upon our decisions. 
The certainty of consciousness is particularly important, for if qualia were constantly changing, the number of potential courses of action would be infinite, which would limit our ability to restrain our behavior based on improbable perceptions of the world around us.  Such is the case of “brain lesions that produce the most profound disturbances in consciousness,” i.e., left temporal lobe seizures.  These involuntary neurological phenomena are characterized by vivid qualia, such as hallucinations of smells, sounds, tastes, and pains.  These oftentimes involve alterations in individuals’ personal identity, sense of destiny, and personality,  as was the case of Paul.  When he was seizing, he could not make deliberate judgments about the world around him;  he was simply experiencing a sensory overload that inhibited his ability to engage in perception in a stable manner.  Given that the left temporal cortex and amygdala are connected through multiple neural pathways,  and the amygdala is the gateway to the limbic system,  damage to specific pathways can result in deeply emotional states that selectively amplify religious words and icons.  This caused Paul to find salience and meaning in almost everything, but particularly to respond in an emotional manner to religious stimuli, so much so that he began to perceive himself as “profoundly spiritual.” 
To better understand how we process sensory information, let us look to the specific neurological structures in our brain that make it possible in the context of vision. The first map of visual information that the human brain creates is actually a filtering and editing process that discards any irrelevant details.  Once the optic nerve carries these messages from the eyes to the brain, the information bifurcates along two pathways.  The first pathway is considered “old” and travels directly to the superior colliculus in the brain stem, and subsequently to higher cortical areas in the parietal lobes.  The second, “new[er]” pathway travels through the lateral geniculate nucleus, which is a relay station, before reaching the primary visual cortex.  This pathway consists of approximately thirty areas that extract different attributes from the visual stimuli, including color, depth, and motion.  The primary visual cortex then splits into two pathways, referred to as the “what” and “how” pathways, which were discovered by Leslie Ungerleider and Mortimer Mischkin at the National Institutes of Health.  The “what” pathway is responsible for identifying and recognizing objects in our environment,  while the “how” pathway specializes in assigning spatial location to objects and includes all aspects of orientation, such as navigating uneven terrain, avoiding obstacles, and judging the distance of objects. 
For this reason, when one or more areas of the brain are selectively damaged, neurological patients can experience paradoxical mental states.  For example, a Swiss woman named Ingrid suffered from “motion blindness” due to bilateral damage to the middle temporal (MT) area of her brain.  She could recognize shapes, identify people, and even read books, because her “what” pathway was intact.  However, she saw moving objects as a series of static, strobe-like snapshots instead of a continuous motion, because her “how” pathway was impaired.  This diminished stability of perception made tasks such as pouring a cup of coffee and crossing the street not only difficult, but also dangerous for Ingrid.  As such, her experience highlights the different aspects of sensory processing that contribute to our perception of the world around us.
Building upon the insights gained from Ramachandran’s first criteria of qualia, we can further explore its multifaceted nature. Importantly, while the perceptual representation created by qualia is irrevocable, it grants us the power of choice.  Qualia-laden sensations, then, provide us with an infinite array of possible associations that we can conjure up in response to a particular stimulus.  On the output side, we can manipulate the perceptual representation with an infinite number of possible associations and responses.  For example, upon finally seeing the Dalmatian, one’s “mind would be poised to conjure up any one of an infinite set of dog-related associations” by way of imagination: the word “dog,” the dog’s bark, its food, other breeds of dog, and the like.  As such, choice constitutes the second criteria of qualia. 
To demonstrate this interplay between sensory perception and the ability to choose one’s course of action, let us consider the internal workings of other natural entities. The Venus flytrap has a unique function, wherein it only snaps shut if its trigger hairs are stimulated twice in a row.  This implies that it stores a memory of the first stimulus and compares it with the second to determine if something has actually moved.  Charles Darwin, the father of evolution, proposed that this mechanism evolved to prevent the plant from mistakenly shutting its trap upon interacting with a dust particle, rather than a bug.  As a result, the Venus flytrap has only “one possible output: invariably clos[ing] shut.”  Given that this sole course of action is inevitable, the second important feature of consciousness – choice – is missing. 
Although, to make decisions based on a qualia-laden stimuli, the representation must persist in the mind for a sufficient duration to enable cognitive processing.  Our brains require an intermediate buffer system to hold the representation.  For instance, when obtaining a phone number from an information operator, an individual may temporarily carry the number with short-term retention abilities to dial it with their fingers.  This serves as the basis for the third criteria of qualia: memory. 
We can better understand this by looking to the Phantom Limb Syndrome, which is a condition in which patients who have had an amputation or other limb loss experience vivid sensations or even pain in the missing limb.  The sensations can include tingling, itching, burning, or pressure, and are often described as feeling like the limb is still present, with the ability to ““reach out” and “grab” objects, point, wave good−bye, shake hands, or perform elaborate skilled manoeuvres” as it used to be able to do before.  These phenomena are results of a disparity between one’s “body image” and the visual feedback received by one’s neurons.  One’s “body image” is constructed from information received from muscles, joints, eyes, and motor command centers in the parietal lobes.  When the motor cortex sends signals to muscles to initiate movement, copies of these signals are sent to the cerebellum and parietal lobes to ensure the movement is executed correctly.  In patients with the Phantom Limb Syndrome, like John, the front part of the brain still sends signals to the missing limb, and these signals are monitored by the parietal lobe, resulting in phantom movements.  So, his brain constructed a dynamic image of the phantom arm based on sensory input from his face and upper arm and information about the commands sent to his arm. 
In some cases, however, as in Philip’s, the phantom limb can feel like it is spasming and stuck in an awkward position, which can be extremely distressing for the individual experiencing it.  This is because seeing a lack of physical movement can relegate the brain into a state of “learned paralysis.”  Neurologists have spent decades establishing the role of the hippocampus in acquiring and consolidating new memory traces.  In the case of Phantom Limb Syndrome, although the limb is no longer present, the memory of it still exists, which the mirror box therapy takes advantage of.  By providing real-time visual feedback, the mirror box creates an illusion of having the missing limb restored with its original abilities, which allows individuals to relive their memories and sensations.  As such, understanding the ways in which this condition works allows us to gain a deeper insight into the nature of qualia, whose criteria are met by the patients with the Phantom Limb Syndrome.
Ultimately, Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness postulates three essential criteria for qualia, namely stability of perception, choice, and memory.  Semir Zeki, Francis Crick, and Christof Koch have suggested that there exists an important relationship between the “binding problem” of these three criteria and the issue of sensory consciousness,  which led them to propose that synchronous 40 Hz oscillations might be causally linked to self-awareness.  Rodolfo Llinás subsequently conducted several experiments based on this hypothesis,  proving that consciousness in the wakeful state is founded on “40 Hz oscillations throughout the cortical mantle in the form of thalamocortical iterative recurrent activity.”  He suggests that the combination of specific and non-specific 40 Hz activity, which occurs along the radial dendritic axis of cortical elements, could produce a cognitive event known as neural activity resonance.  The brain stem modulates this resonance, which is stimulated by sensory input during wakefulness.  Engel et al. furthered this argument, positing that when neurons in different parts of the brain fire together in a synchronized manner, effectively achieving “temporal synchrony,” they can form cell assemblies that integrate information and contribute to the “selection of perceptual and behaviorally relevant information.” 
In some cases, however, the neurons are not entirely integrated.  Let us look to the case of the Capgras’ Delusion to contextualize the function of such temporal synchrony in consciousness.  Following a severe car accident, one of Ramachandran’s patients, Arthur, reported that his real parents had been replaced by “imposters” who, while recognizable, appeared unfamiliar to him.  The Capgras’ Delusion causes individuals to perceive familiar people, such as their parents, children, spouse or siblings, as identical-looking strangers.  As such, Arthur would repeatedly claim that “[the man] looks exactly like my father but he really isn’t. He’s a nice guy, doctor, but he certainly isn’t my father!” 
We know that the “what” pathway is responsible for recognizing faces.  However, Arthur’s connections between the face region and the amygdala were selectively damaged in the accident, causing a disparity between his “what” pathway and his emotional response pathway.  So, although Arthur could recognize his parents, specifically his mother, he did not experience the “warm glow” of love when looking at their faces,  which was measured by his diminished Galvanic Skin Response (GSR).  This was why he continued to question why her presence did not feel familiar, and why his brain rationalized the unfamiliarity by assuming that the woman he saw was an “impostor” who simply resembled his mother. 
It is evident, then, that simply meeting the three criteria for qualia is not a sufficient basis for an awareness of our “selves,” of the world around us, and of how we are situated in space and time.  Rather, it is when individuals possess stability of perception, are able to make choices, and have memory, as well as have neurons firing in a synchronized manner at 40 Hz, that consciousness emerges.  Consciousness, then,

[At the phenomenal level] … can be described as a singular, unified field of recursive self-awareness, consistently coherent in a particular way; that of a subject located both spatially and temporally in an egocentrically-extended domain, such that conscious self-awareness is explicitly characterized by I-ness, now-ness and here-ness. 

Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness, however, goes on to explain what lies beyond the conscious mind.  He posits the notion of neurological zombies, i.e., non-conscious beings that exist at the nexus of the evolved and unevolved brains within each of us.  These entities possess a stability of perception akin to conscious entities and exhibit high levels of alertness and skill in performing complex movements.  However, they lack the capacity for fully voluntary decision-making and are limited to de-facto choices.  Additionally, they are unable to form new memories and can only access previously formed memories.  This non-conscious zombie state of being arises from the firing of neurons in the brain between 17 and 39 Hz, which are not synchronized in a manner that would give rise to a conscious experience.  The elucidation of the existence of neurological zombies has illuminated various previously enigmatic phenomena, such as the occurrence of habitual actions, reflexes, and other instinctual behaviors that unfold subtly beyond the ambit of conscious awareness.  A common instance of such conduct is the “highway hypnosis,” which occurs when one drives for extended periods of time in an automated sense without being cognizant of where one is or what one is doing.  Still, one is able to reach one’s intended destination safely. 
A particularly interesting case that illustrates such a neurological phenomenon is that of Diane, whose experience with carbon monoxide poisoning resulted in irreversible binding of the gas to her hemoglobin, leaving her unconscious in her shower for almost twenty minutes.  Though she was saved, parts of her brain tissue had permanently atrophied, causing her to lose some of her cognitive abilities.  When she woke up from the coma, she had lost her vision completely.  Although she could perceive colors and textures within days, she could not recognize shapes, objects, or faces.  Still, her blindness did not hinder her from identifying people through their voices or objects by touch.  For example, during one of her sessions with Dr. Milner, he handed her a pencil, which she swiftly and precisely took from his hand with incredible dexterity.  When he asked her to mail a letter through the slot, she could not verbally determine its direction,  but still was able to align it with the slot’s orientation and drop it through the opening in an effortless manner. 
Diane’s case, then, seems to demonstrate the existence of a neurological zombie, so let us understand whether it matches the characteristics of such an entity. Given that she could not identify physical features of her environment, such as color, shape, and direction, we know that her “what” pathway was severely damaged.  Still, her “how” pathway remained largely functional, as she was able to determine the spatial orientation of objects around her.  As such, Diane did possess stability of perception, but her actions seem to have been performed without her realizing how, as if another being within her had taken control and steered her hand toward the goal.  We can see the same principle in action when a sharp tap on the knee tendon results in a reflex knee jerk in paraplegic individuals.  The body, then, has access to the memory that such an action has occurred, but cannot create a new impression of the mechanisms underlying its actions,  and cannot decide to engage in those actions though it might appear to: a defining property of de-facto choice.  Similarly, Diane’s damaged “what” pathway would have caused her to fail if she were forced to make a choice between two slots, one vertical and one horizontal.  Therefore, it is evident that a zombie was at work within Diane by way of her “how” pathway, which, despite carrying the ability to perform complex actions, could not make intentional decisions. 
Beyond consciousness and non-consciousness, there are periods of time in which we humans are unconscious.  This can occur when the unevolved part of the brain is in control, as is the case when we are asleep and dreaming.  During this time, our perception is unstable and disordered, with dreams often being chaotic and unpredictable.  In fact, during the Rapid Eye Movement (REM) stage of sleep, when most of our dreaming occurs, our brain actively inhibits motor responses to the external world, which is known as sleep paralysis.  Therefore, any choices made during sleep would be considered involuntary, such as turning over in bed due to discomfort or reacting to a sudden loud noise.  In this state, access to memories is limited, and the formation of new memories is difficult, which is why dreams are often quickly forgotten.  The brain activity during these periods is characterized by neuronal firing between 5 and 16 Hz, which is not synchronized in a way that would support conscious experience.  Once this activity falls to 0 Hz, though, an individual would be braindead.  Thus, it is through Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness that we have been able to gain a greater insight into the mysteries of the human mind.
We can understand consciousness, then, to be a necessary condition for autonomy.  Immanuel Kant provides us with a justification for this claim, with his philosophical argument being centered on the idea that all humans have rational capacity,  i.e., our ability to reason and act on principles that can be shared with other rational beings.  It is through the exercise of our rational capacity that we are able to act as free agents, transcending the limitations of our individuality to recognize and work in accordance with universal and objective truths.  When consciousness and rationality work in conjunction, we can act autonomously to overcome the constraints of nature, our instincts, and external influences. 
This would entail, then, that not all conscious beings are autonomous.  Animals, for example, are conscious but do not possess the same rational capacities as humans.  Rather than fully rational decision-making abilities, animals possess a stability of perception, memory, and de-facto choice.  To better understand this, we can examine the phenomenon of language acquisition. According to Noam Chomsky, while some animals like dogs can respond to certain vocal commands, they lack the ability to acquire language in the way that humans do.  Humans have an innate linguistic faculty that involves introspection, reflecting on and evaluating oneself, and most importantly, the recursive function. 
Recursion, here, refers to

… the ability to embed our thoughts within other thoughts… to take its own output as the next input, a loop that can be extended indefinitely to create sequences or structures of unbounded length or complexity. 

Steven Pinker and Ray Jackendoff extend this notion to discuss recursion as “a procedure that calls itself, or… a constituent that contains a constituent of the same kind,”  which highlights its dual nature as both a process and a structure.  This component of consciousness has the potential to continue indefinitely in principle in the human mind;  in reality, however, it is limited.  This is because humans are the only creatures who possess the ability to count ad infinitum and comprehend the concept of an endless series.  Our recursive function, then, allows us to mentally travel in time and insert consciousness of the past or future into present consciousness;  to “reflect upon our own minds… [and] simulate the minds of others.” 
In 1637, French philosopher René Descartes crafted a simple yet profound statement that has since reverberated throughout the centuries.  “Cogito, ergo sum,” he penned in Latin – a phrase that has become synonymous with the concept of self-awareness.  And while this phrase is often translated to “I think, therefore I am,”  the words of Ambrose Bierce, “Cogito cogito ergo cogito sum,” may better capture the recursive nature of Descartes’s insight: “I think I think, therefore I think I am.”  Indeed, Descartes’s perception reveals the inherent power of the human mind – a power that is distinguished by its ability to reason and think deeply.  For Descartes, doubting was not a sign of weakness, but rather a proof of existence.  In essence, his argument was that the mere act of doubting necessitates the presence of a doubter.  It was through this line of reasoning that Descartes highlighted the role of recursion in our mental lives – a characteristic that is uniquely human. 
In The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, Julian Jaynes proposes a theory about the origins of human consciousness, suggesting that before the development of consciousness as we know it today, humans had a bicameral mind, with the two hemispheres of the brain functioning independently from each other.  Jaynes suggests that in the bicameral mind, the left hemisphere of the brain would communicate with the right hemisphere through auditory hallucinations, which used to be interpreted as the voice of the gods or ancestors.  As such, people would be guided by these auditory hallucinations, and they would act on them without questioning the same or considering alternative options.  According to Jaynes, this was a way for early humans to make decisions and navigate the world without the need for thinking as we know it today. 
In The Recursive Mind, Michael Corballis builds on this analysis to argue that what came with our inner voice was our capacity for recursion, which became “critical to survival in the harsh conditions of the Pleistocene epoch,” and that “it evolved to foster social cohesion” for the purpose of ensuring human survival.  Jaynes suggests that as human society became more complex, the bicameral mind broke down, and consciousness emerged as a way for humans to make decisions independently of the auditory hallucinations.  This shift in the way humans made decisions is said to have played a role in the development of language, as consciousness allowed for more complex forms of communication and decision-making. 
Corballis poignantly articulates that alongside these abilities, our language evolved to incorporate recursive thinking, initially through physical gestures and eventually through speech.  Today, humans can generate an unlimited number of sentences by applying grammatical rules recursively.  This application of recursive principles to these activities has ultimately paved the way for the development of complex human civilizations, kindled our ability to solve problems and cooperate with others, ushered in the “extinction of fellow large-brained hominins like the Neanderthals,” and sparked the supremacy of Homo Sapiens over our material world.  Given that it is this recursive structure of our evolved brain’s neural networks that gives rise to our subjective experiences of the world, it is clear that understanding the role of recursion in human consciousness is crucial to unlocking the mysteries of the mind.
As aforementioned, non-conscious beings exist at the nexus of the evolved and unevolved brain, and so they are primarily driven by external stimuli rather than internal goals or intentions;  in which case, they lack the capacity for autonomous decision-making.  Instead, Ramachandran’s neurological zombies are heteronomous entities, a notion we can better understand by looking to the case of Kenneth Parks.  Parks, similar to somnambulists, performed a series of actions on the night that he killed his mother- and father-in-law (Barbara and Donald Woods), all of which he had no recollection of: he put on his shoes, picked up his car keys, left the front door of the house open, left his garage door open, and drove 23 km through the streets of Toronto to the Woods’ house.  Upon investigation, it was found that Parks did not have any motive to strangle and stab Donald and Barbara respectively, the latter of whose brains he smashed with a tire iron.  The couple loved him like a son and immensely appreciated his persuasion of their daughter, his wife, against running away from home when they were getting married. 
Still, Parks didn’t show up at his in-law’s house on accident: he was supposed to have been there for a barbecue picnic the next day, but given that he had been sleep deprived for 48 hours,  was undergoing major physical stress (Parks had played rugby on a significantly hot day when he was “incredibly out of shape”),  and emotional stress (he was a gambler with significant debt, which was putting a strain on his marriage, and he was scheduled to reveal the same to his in-laws the next day),  he inadvertently arrived 12 hours earlier.  Importantly, Kenneth Parks had a long history of sleepwalking.  When he was eleven, his mother caught him just as he was about to jump out the window of their sixth-floor residence to his death.  Many of his relatives, too, suffered from parasomnia, i.e., sleepwalking, sleep terrors, sleep talking, among other sleep-related disorders. 
In any case, after the horrors of the night, Parks walked into a police station early in the morning and confessed that he thought he had killed somebody.  The police made an extremely important observation, i.e., Parks had accidentally cut off the tendons of all his fingers, but didn’t appear to be in any pain;  indicating that his “what” pathway governing his ability to identify sensory experiences was temporarily suspended.  As such, we can determine the following: he had stability of perception, because he was able to drive safely for hours,  indicating that his “how” pathway governing his spatial orientation was intact.  Further, while he had created no new memory of the events that took place or realize what he had done because of the interruption in his “what” pathway, Parks did have access to his previous memories insofar as he drove with an appropriate sense of direction to his in-law’s house.  Lastly, he engaged in actions, but not quite voluntarily, in the sense that he appeared to be operating on autopilot. 
Thus, it is clear that Kenneth Parks was acting non-consciously as one of Ramachandran’s zombies.  This indirect acknowledgement by clinicists led to his defense of “non-insane automatism,” which asserts that a person cannot be held criminally liable or responsible for their actions if they are entirely involuntary and beyond their control,  even if the person is not classified as legally insane under the M’Naghten Rule.  Parks’ neurological state, characterized by temporal asynchrony functioning between 17 and 39 Hz, then, prevented him from forming the necessary guilty intent for the crime, known as ‘mens rea.’  This defense was accepted by the Canadian courts, in recognition of the fact that Parks was not acting autonomously, but rather heteronomously, due to his neurological state: he could not have acted otherwise. 
Since neurological zombies lack qualia, any behavior they exhibit would be devoid of conscious intentionality and thus cannot be faked by individuals who do possess subjective experience.  This can best be understood by looking to the case of Scott Falater.  Falater’s neighbor found him rolling his unconscious wife into their pool one fateful night.  After seeing her covered in blood, Falater held her head under the water, drowning her.  He then went up to his room to change his clothes, but on the way back, came into contact with his dog, who he quieted.  For some context, it is significant to note that Falater and his wife Yarmilla were having problems in their marriage: he was spending too much time on church activities, wanted more children than she did, and there were allegations of cheating on her part at the time as well.  Yarmilla had made clear that was on the verge of divorcing Scott. 
On the cold night that Falater killed Yarmilla, he put on a coat, got up from watching television, and went to fix the pool rig.  His claim was that when he “bumped into” Yarmilla, his aggressive somnambulist-self stabbed her 45 times without him being consciously awake.  However, after changing his clothes, Falater bandaged his hand, which was bleeding. This suggests that he did feel pain, unlike Parks.  Further, he hid the blood-stained clothes in the trunk of his car, which indicate choice and voluntary decision-making.  As such, the court recognized that he was neither a neurological zombie nor a somnambulist based on clinical investigation, and ruled that Falater had consciously killed his wife in cold blood.  It is evident, then, that humans can both be autonomous and heteronomous, depending on whether their neurological state deems them conscious, non-conscious, or unconscious. 
Surely I am not suggesting, however, that human beings who are conscious always act autonomously. To be sure, there is an important distinction to be made here between a capacity on the one hand, and the exercise of that capacity on the other. As human beings, we are subject to a wide range of passions, impulses, and desires that can undermine our rational capacities and inhibit our ability to act reasonably.  These may include powerful emotions such as lust, hunger, and anger, which can cloud our judgment and lead us to act without exercising our autonomous capacity.  Furthermore, institutions such as military conscription may require individuals to follow orders or conform to certain rules about vaccination procedures, which can limit their autonomy.  In these cases, individuals are acting heteronomously, as they are subordinate to external forces beyond their control.  However, insofar as individuals consent to being subject to such institutional parameters, such those in the armed forces, they would have made an autonomous decision. 
Another interlocuter might suggest that even though Kenneth Parks was acting heteronomously in accordance with Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness, he should not be exempt from any judgment whatsoever.  To respond to this suggestion, I would begin with David Shoemaker’s argument that a binary approach to moral responsibility fails insofar as it does not account for cases of ‘marginal agency,’ wherein individuals might qualify for a degree of partial responsibility.  De Sio and Di Nucci suggest that blame, condemnation, and disapproval are generally appropriate in cases where the individual meets the conditions of ‘marginal agency.’  These conditions include being a full member of the moral community at the time of the action, engaging in voluntary behavior, and having the right causal connection with a bad outcome. 
They apply these criteria to evaluate Parks’ behavior, and conclude that Parks falls short of fully satisfying the status and voluntary action conditions;  by extension, his actions were not fully attributable to him due to his condition of non-consciousness.  However, the fact that he did kill his in-laws suffices in establishing the causal connection to the outcome of their death;  in which case, he was physically responsible, and his actions are morally blameworthy.  So, I would argue that assigning Parks’ character itself moral blame, condemnation, or disapproval would be unjustified, given that his neurological state as heteronomous rendered him not a moral agent because he lacked the necessary capacity for rational decision-making.
To be sure, our exploration into the profound and multi-layered phenomenon of human consciousness leaves us with a newfound appreciation for its complex and nuanced nature. Through the lens of V. S. Ramachandran’s Neuro-bio-chemical Theory of Consciousness, we have been able to discern a threefold criteria for qualia that serves to determine whether an individual is truly conscious or not, with the stability of perception, choice, and memory all playing integral roles in coalescing at a resonant frequency of 40 Hz to produce consciousness.  However, in our quest to understand what truly sets humans apart from other beings, we have unearthed a startling realization: it is not consciousness itself, but rather our rational capacity that renders us unique.  This capacity, which is made possible through the recursive function, allows us to engage in complex problem-solving and decision-making processes that have propelled us to the apex of the evolutionary ladder.  Yet, as we have discovered, our autonomy and ability to exercise free will can be compromised, leading to a state of heteronomy.  The neurological zombie state of non-consciousness serves as a stark reminder of the limitations of our conscious control over our thoughts, feelings, and actions,  which has forced us to contemplate whether we can hold everybody to the same degree of accountability.  Understanding this, it is incumbent upon the criminal justice system within and outside of the United States to consider the complexities of human consciousness for the purpose of designing better mechanisms of adjudicating the various degrees of responsibility, and thereby ensuring both equitable and justifiable sentencing.

Bibliography

Birch, Jonathan. “The Place of Animals in Kantian Ethics.” Biological Philosophy, vol. 35, no. 1, 24 Dec. 2019, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-019-9712-0.
Bob, Petr, and Olga Louchakova. “Dissociative States in Dreams and Brain Chaos: Implications for Creative Awareness.” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 6, 7 Sept. 2015, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01353.
Boda, Mihaly. “Chapter 7: Soldiers’ Autonomy and Military Authority.” Military Ethics and Leadership, vol. 3, 1 Jan. 2017, International Studies on Military Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004339590_008.
Busby, John C. “M’Naghten Rule.” Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 9 June 2022, https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/m%27naghten_rule.
Chomsky, Noam. “Chapter 7: Biolinguistics and the Human Capacity.” Language and Mind, 3rd ed., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York, NY, 1986.
Chomsky, Noam, and Mitsou Ronat. “The Birth of Generative Grammar.” On Language, New Press, New York, NY, 1998.
Churchland, Paul M. “Subjective Qualia from a Materialist Point of View.” PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, vol. 1984, 1984, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/192538.
Corballis, Michael C. “Chapter 1: What Is Recursion?” The Recursive Mind: The Origins of Human Language, Thought, and Civilization, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2014.
Crick, Francis, and Christof Koch. “Towards a Neurobiological Theory of Consciousness.” Seminars in the Neurosciences, vol. 2, 13 Jan. 1990, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470751466.ch45.
De Sio, Filippo Santoni, and Ezio Di Nucci. “Pushing the Margins of Responsibility: Lessons from Parks’ Somnambulistic Killing.” Neuroethics, vol. 11, no. 1, 22 Mar. 2017, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12152-017-9311-1.
Descartes, René. “Je Pense, Donc Je Suis.” Discourse on the Method and Meditations on First Philosophy, Hackett Pub. Co, Indianapolis, IN, 1986.
Engel, Andreas K., et al. “Temporal Binding, Binocular Rivalry, and Consciousness.” Consciousness and Cognition, vol. 8, no. 2, 1999, https://doi.org/10.1006/ccog.1999.0389.
Ghosh, Arko, and Patrick Haggard. “The Spinal Reflex Cannot Be Perceptually Separated from Voluntary Movements.” The Journal of Physiology, vol. 592, no. 1, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2013.260588.
Graziano, Michael. “True Nature of Consciousness: Solving the Biggest Mystery of Your Mind.” Mind, 18 Oct. 2019, www.newscientist.com/article/mg24332480-000-true-nature-of-consciousness-solving-the-biggest-mystery-of-your-mind/. 
Henke, Katharina, et al. “Human Hippocampus Associates Information in Memory.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 96, no. 10, 1999, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/48212.
Horn, Mike. “A Rude Awakening: What to Do with the Sleepwalking Defense?” Boston College Law Review, vol. 46, no. 1, 6 Sept. 2022.
Hudachek, Lauren, and Erin J Wamsley. “A Meta-Analysis of the Relation between Dream Content and Memory Consolidation.” Sleep, 14 Apr. 2023, https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsad111. 
Jaynes, Julian. “Chapter 4: The Bicameral Mind.” The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, 1st ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1982.
Jaynes, Julian. “Chapter 5: The Double Brain.” The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, 1st ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1982.
Jaynes, Julian. “Chapter 6: The Origins of Civilization.” The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, 1st ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1982.
Kitcher, Patricia. “Chapter 9: Kant on the Unity of Self-Consciousness and Moral Agency.” The Self, 20 Aug. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190087265.003.0012. 
Lamer, Antonio. “R. v. Parks.” Decisions and Resources (Criminal Law), 27 Aug. 1992, https://scc-csc.lexum.com/scc-csc/scc-csc/en/item/907/index.do. 
Llinás, R. R., and D. Paré. “Of Dreaming and Wakefulness.” Neuroscience, vol. 44, no. 3, 1991, https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4522(91)90075-y.
Llinás, Rodolfo, and Urs Ribary. “Coherent 40-Hz Oscillation Characterizes Dream State in Humans.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 90, no. 5, 1993, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2361462.
Llinás, R., et al. “The Neuronal Basis for Consciousness.” Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, vol. 353, no. 1377, 1998, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/56899.
Mainieri, Greta, et al. “Are Sleep Paralysis and False Awakenings Different from REM Sleep and from Lucid REM Sleep? A Spectral EEG Analysis.” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, vol. 17, no. 4, 2021, https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.9056.
Packer, Mark. “Kant on Desire and Moral Pleasure.” Journal of the History of Ideas, vol. 50, no. 3, 1989, JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2709570.
Peters, Frederic. “Consciousness as Recursive, Spatiotemporal Self-Location.” Nature Precedings, vol. 74, no. 4, 31 Oct. 2008, https://doi.org/10.1038/npre.2008.2444.1.
Pinker, Steven, and Ray Jackendoff. “The Nature of the Language Faculty and Its Implications for Evolution of Language.” Cognition, vol. 97, no. 2, 12 Apr. 2005, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2005.04.006.
Ramachandran, V. S. “Introduction: No Mere Ape.” The Tell-Tale Brain: A Neuroscientist’s Quest for What Makes Us Human, W. W. Norton & Company, New York, NY, 2011.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 3: Chasing the Phantom.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 4: The Zombie in the Brain.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 8: “The Unbearable Likeness of Being”.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 9: God and the Limbic System.” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. “Chapter 12: Do Martians See Red?” Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, 1st ed., Harper Perennial, New York, NY, 2009.
Rosenthal, David M. “Consciousness and the Mind.” Iyyun: The Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly / עיון: רבעון פילוסופי, vol. 51, 2002, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23352846.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, & Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 30 Jan. 2023.
Smaw, Eric D. “Lecture in PHI 242 – Zombies, Serial Killers, & Madmen.” Ward Hall, Room 1, 8 Feb. 2023.
True Crime, FilmRise. “Forensic Files - Season 9, Episode 30 - Walking Terror - Full Episode.” YouTube, YouTube, 1 Jan. 2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvNeaVXthno. 
Whitman, James Q. “Presumption of Innocence or Presumption of Mercy?: Weighing Two Western Modes of Justice.” Texas Law Review, vol. 94, no. 5, 2015, https://texaslawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Whitman.FinalPDF.pdf.
Williams, Griffith Wynne. “Highway Hypnosis: A Hypothesis.” International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, vol. 11, no. 3, 1963, https://doi.org/10.1080/00207146308409239.
World Science Festival. “The Curious Case of Kenneth Parks.” YouTube, YouTube, 18 Mar. 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AuWAkREjl6U.
Vujoševiċ, Marijana. “The Kantian Capacity for Moral Self-Control: Abstraction at Two Levels.” Archiv Für Geschichte Der Philosophie, vol. 102, no. 1, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1515/agph-2020-1004.
Zeki, S., and A. Bartels. “The Autonomy of the Visual Systems and the Modularity of Conscious Vision.” Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, vol. 353, no. 1377, 1998, JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/56906.